KEP-5075: DRA: Dynamic Device Provisioning Support (#5104)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/5075-dra-consumable-capacity/README.md

<!-- /toc -->

## Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [ ] (R) Enhancement issue in release milestone, which links to KEP dir in [kubernetes/enhancements] (not the initial KEP PR)
- [ ] (R) KEP approvers have approved the KEP status as `implementable`
- [ ] (R) Design details are appropriately documented
- [ ] (R) Test plan is in place, giving consideration to SIG Architecture and SIG Testing input (including test refactors)
  - [ ] e2e Tests for all Beta API Operations (endpoints)
  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed

> - [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved

Author: Thank you. I ticked off the last two items.

### Risks and Mitigations

- The requested amount in the resource claim may not satisfy the capacity consumption policy,
  especially if the requested amount exceeds the maximum allowed consumption.

  This scenario should be handled similarly to other scheduling issues, such as when the request exceeds the allocatable capacity. 
  In such cases, the allocation should be rejected, and the user should be notified that the requested capacity cannot be fulfilled 
  due to policy constraints.

- The driver includes both shared and non-sharable devices. There is a risk that a user may be allocated a shared device 
  (e.g., a shared network device) and accidentally configure it with the HostDevice CNI plugin. 
  This would move the device from the host into the user's pod, preventing other users from accessing the shared device.

  **Mitigation:**
  - Administrators should define clear device classes for shared and non-shared devices to prevent such misallocations.

## Design Details

This enhancement introduces a `shared` field within the `Device` of the ResourceSlice

> to mark whether the device is a shared device.

Author: @pohly Thank you. I change  "shared" to "sharable" for the resource slice context.

> to mark whether the device is a shared device.

Reviewer: @pohly I don't this "consumeable" is a correct word, so we use only "consumable" here. Both "sharable" and "shareable" are correct, and I think "shareable" is more common.

> to mark whether the device is a shared device.

Author: @LionelJouin Thank you for your explanation. I also confirmed that the other KEPs also use "shareable". Made a change.

The shared device can be assigned to more than one request if it satisfies the selection criteria and constraints.
The select condition `device.shared == true/false` is used to identify to select the device with a `shared` property or not.

> The enhancement also adds a `ConsumptionPolicy` field to `DeviceCapacity`.

Author: Thank you. I changed from "ConsumptionPolicy" to "SharingPolicy" and remove claim policy at one point in the description and replace claimPolicy in the example.

type DeviceCapacity struct {
   // Value defines how much of a certain device capacity is available.
   //
   // +required
   Value resource.Quantity

   // ConsumptionPolicy specifies that this device capacity must be consumed
   // by each resource claim according to the defined consumption policy.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   ConsumptionPolicy *CapacityConsumptionPolicy
}

// CapacityConsumptionPolicy defines consumption policy for consumable capacity.
// The policy can be either of an available range or a discrete set.
// The policy must have a default value.
// Either one of the consumption policies must be defined.
type CapacityConsumptionPolicy struct {
   // DiscreteValues defines a set of acceptable quantities of consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ConsumptionPolicy
   DiscreteValues *CapacityConsumptionPolicyDiscrete

   // ValueRange defines an acceptable quantity range of consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ConsumptionPolicy
   ValueRange *CapacityConsumptionPolicyRange
}

// CapacityConsumptionPolicyDiscrete defines a set of discrete allowable capacity values.

> // If Options is not provided, only default value is valid.

Author: It should be (c). However, do we need to validate that it must not be in the options in webhook validation or just put in description only that default must not be in the options?

> // If Options is not provided, only default value is valid.

Reviewer 2: You need to enforce this through validation in `pkg/apis/resource/validation/validation.go`, otherwise it's just a convention and users might not follow it. Such ambiguity is bad and better avoided.

It's best practice to ignore validation while prototyping because implementing it early means that more code needs to be updated when updating the API, but we need it before merging the implementation.

type CapacityConsumptionPolicyRange struct {
    // Minimum specifies the minimum capacity allowed for a consumption request.
    // This also acts as the default if no value is specified.
    //
    // +required
    Minimum resource.Quantity

    // Maximum defines the upper limit for capacity that can be requested.
    //
    // +optional
    Maximum *resource.Quantity

    // ChunkSize defines the step size between valid capacity amounts within the range.
    // If set, requested amounts are rounded up to the nearest multiple of ChunkSize from the Minimum.
    //
    // +optional
    ChunkSize *resource.Quantity
}
```

#### ResourceClaimSpec's DeviceRequest

```go

type DeviceRequest struct {
...
   // CapacityRequests define resource requirements against each capacity.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   CapacityRequests *CapacityRequirements
}

// CapacityRequirements defines the capacity requirements for a specific device request.
type CapacityRequirements struct {
    // Minimum defines the minimum quantity of device capacity required for each specified resource in the request.
    //

>     // If the resource has a consumption policy, this value is rounded up to the nearest valid amount

Author: I changed to "resource" to "capacity" instead.

>     // If the resource has a consumption policy, this value is rounded up to the nearest valid amount

Reviewer 2: Yes, that's what I meant to write... and then didn't.

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [x] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [x] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

The enhancement enables allocating the same device to multiple device requests 

> until all available resources of that device are consumed by requests.

Reviewer 3: Usage examples show that shared devices can also have unlimited capacity (Story 1 in [[PUBLIC] DRA: Per-device Consumable Capacity](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1U0u2uErpYcf-RooPEws5oDMiJ9kT2uDoWNjcWrLH224/edit?tab=t.f3ylp1uxsq1c)). Shouldn't this special case be explicitly called here as the supported one in the summary?

Reviewer 2: Not only in the summary, but also in the example section because it is not immediately obvious: if a capacity is consumable, it is always finite. An unlimited capacity is always a capacity with no policy and thus not a capacity that gets consumed. @sunya-ch: is that correct?

Author: This single sentence seems to highlight only consumable capacity which has a finite limit. 

How's about changing to 

> The enhancement allows a single device to be allocated to multiple requests. 
If certain resources on the device are limited for sharing, the device can be shared until all available limited resources are consumed by requests.

As @pohly mentioned, if a capacity is consumable, it is finite. Without policy, the capacity will not get consumed.

Reviewer 3: I'm still missing clear statement about semantic of non-consumable devices (without a policy). Maybe you could add:

If the device is shared but all resources are not consumable (the sharing policy is not specified), the device can be shared by unlimited number of requests.

The select condition `device.sharable == true/false` is used to identify to select the device with a `sharable` property or not.

The enhancement also adds a `SharingPolicy` field to `DeviceCapacity`.
This field specifies how the capacity can be sharable between different requests.
The sharing policy can be either specify a range of valid values or a discrete set of them.
Each policy has a default value, either explicitly or implicitly.

Users can define specific per-device resource requests through the newly added `CapacityRequests` field in the `DeviceRequest`. Each contains a minimum required device capacity.
If the capacity is consumable, the amount available for allocation is determined
by subtracting the aggregated allocation results of current claims from the device's capacity as defined in the resource slice.
The remaining amount will be used solely by the allocator and will not be reflected in the resource slice.
The calculation of capacity requirements will round the requested capacity up to the nearest valid amount,
based on the capacity's sharing policy.

> If users do not specify a capacity request for consumable capacity, the default consumed value will be applied.

Author: @dom4ha 

If the device doesn't have sharing policy set to guarantee the sharing, users cannot get sharable device exclusively by design. 
However, if the driver supports guarantee resource (such as bandwidth in network device), users can request for the whole bandwidth to have all resource for themselves.

> There is always such a default because capacities without a policy are not consumable.

Author: @dom4ha The one without a policy will not be consumable. Its available amount will not be deducted (consumed) when allocated to the claim.

A sharable device can only be allocated once its consumability has been verified
and its attributes match the request's selectors and constraints.
The newly added `capacities` field in the `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` will be set when the allocation is successful.

### API enhancement

> To enable this enhancement, the following API updates are proposed.

Reviewer 2: Adding `+listMapKey=shareUID` to

https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/5ec7b65318afb91b8d77f3f262ee0b93dcd84b5f/staging/src/k8s.io/api/resource/v1beta2/types.go#L1144-L1150

needs to be mentioned.

#### ResourceSliceSpec's Device

```go

// Device represents one individual hardware instance that can be selected based
// on its attributes. Besides the name, exactly one field must be set.
type Device struct {
...
   // Sharable marks whether the device is sharable.
   //
   // A device with sharable="true" can be allocated more than once.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity

>    Sharable *bool

Author: Sharable flag is used only to exclude sharable devices from other non-sharable devices during allocation.
The device can have no consumable capacity (capacity without sharing policy) while it is still sharable by multiple claims and get a different share UID.

And, yes, I agree that we should have validation SharingPolicy can be set only if Sharable flag is set on the device.

>    Sharable *bool

Reviewer 3: So there is a semantic change to all non consumable capacities. Maybe it's worth to add that non-consumable capacities will become shared, as it's not super obvious.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### GA

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

-->

> ### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

Author: @dom4ha Thank you. I have updated the section.

// Exactly one of the consumption policies must be defined.
type CapacitySharingPolicy struct {
   // DiscreteValues defines a set of acceptable quantity values in consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=SharingPolicy
   DiscreteValues *CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete

   // ValueRange defines an acceptable quantity value range in consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=SharingPolicy
   ValueRange *CapacitySharingPolicyRange
}

// CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete defines a set of discrete allowed capacity values.
// If Options is not provided, only default value is valid.
//
// - If the requested amount is not listed in the options, it is rounded up to the next higher valid value.
// - If the requested amount exceeds the maximum value in the available options, the request does not satisfy the policy,
//   and the device cannot be allocated.
type CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete struct {
    // Default specifies the default capacity to be used for a consumption request
    // if no value is explicitly provided.
    //
    // +required
    Default resource.Quantity

    // Options defines a list of additional valid capacity values that can be requested.

>     // The Default must not be one of the Options.

Author: @dom4ha  
I update summary and explanation of shareable field based on your suggestion. However, I cannot address this comment. Could you please explain more about it? What is the opposite option you mentioned here?

>     // The Default must not be one of the Options.

Reviewer 3: What I suggested, the default could be one of the options (instead of being an additional one). Whenever we'd need iterating over all options, it would be simpler if the the default one was already included.

>     // The Default must not be one of the Options.

Author: We need a default value when defining a policy and I think we should better have an explicit default field. An alternative way is to have only single option field and assume the first value or minimum value is a default value but I think it is not trivial to set that assumption.

About the options field, as @pohly mentioned, there are three possible relationships between default and options fields and I agree that we should avoid ambiguity with option c.

> If options are provided, does the default a) have to be one of them, b) may or may not be one of them or c) must not be one of them?
> 
> I'm leaning towards c because of the "additional valid capacity values" wording, because it avoids ambiguity (option b) and avoids the need to list the default twice (option a).

>     // The Default must not be one of the Options.

Author: @liggitt  Based on your suggestion and @pohly comment (avoids the need to list the default twice (option a).), Should I change `Default` to `DefaultIndex` to avoid the need to list the same value twice and easier to validate the index must be lower than the option length?  @dom4ha @pohly Could you please share your thought?

based on the capacity's sharing policy.

If users do not specify a capacity request for consumable capacity, the default consumed value will be applied.
There is always such a default because capacities without a policy are not consumable.

A shareable device can only be allocated once its consumability has been verified
and its attributes match the request's selectors and constraints.
The newly added `capacities` field in the `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` will be set when the allocation is successful.

### API enhancement
To enable this enhancement, the following API updates are proposed.

#### ResourceSliceSpec's Device

```go

// Device represents one individual hardware instance that can be selected based
// on its attributes. Besides the name, exactly one field must be set.
type Device struct {
...
   // Shareable marks whether the device is shareable.
   //
   // A device with shareable="true" can be allocated more than once,
   // and its capacity is shared, regardless of whether the CapacitySharingPolicy is defined or not.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity

>    Shareable *bool

Author: @sanposhiho 
How's about defining enum DeviceClaimPolicy and having DeviceClaimOnce (default), and DeviceClaimMany values?

cc: @pohly @LionelJouin @johnbelamaric @mortent @dom4ha

>    Shareable *bool

Reviewer 2: We can use `claimMode: many` instead of `shareable: true`. We can allow an explicit `claimMode: once`, but I don't think we can add defaulting for it. If we did, then we would end up storing an alpha-level field in all ResourceSlices, whether the driver uses the feature or not. I think that's not desirable.

So "DeviceClaimOnce (default)" would mean "if unset, the mode is DeviceClaimOnce". I'm okay with this.

>    Shareable *bool

Reviewer 2: Let me add that we have a few "bool" fields in the API already. They can be sufficient for cases where we really don't see a need to expand the semantic later on. In this case I can't think of a future extension, but I also cannot really rule it out.

>    Shareable *bool

Author: According to the discussion in the meeting call today, I added DeviceClaimMode as an alternative for identifying shareable property of device in the KEP.

>    Shareable *bool

Reviewer 4: > We can allow an explicit claimMode: once, but I don't think we can add defaulting for it. If we did, then we would end up storing an alpha-level field in all ResourceSlices, whether the driver uses the feature or not. I think that's not desirable.

You are correct we don't want to default values into alpha fields whose feature gate is not enabled.

You can either avoid defaulting altogether or do conditional defaulting only when the feature gate is enabled. In either case, clients will have to handle the field being absent and connect it to implicit default behavior.

>    Shareable *bool

Reviewer 2: I prefer to not add defaulting in this case. We are sensitive about the size of ResourceSlices. Automatically adding a string to each non-shareable device seems unnecessary when clients cannot rely on that string to be set in all circumstances.

>    Shareable *bool

Author: @liggitt Thank you for the comment. From the above option, ClaimMode seems to be more clear than Shareable. 
If we want to keep a simple boolean, how about rename the field `Shareable` to `AllowMultipleClaims`. Could you please advise which one is preferable?

>    Shareable *bool

Reviewer 2: It's not just multiple claims. It could also be multiple requests in the same claim.

I prefer `allocationMode: once` (implicit default, current semantic) and `allocationMode: many`. This avoids the terms "sharing" and "claim".

>    Shareable *bool

Author: @pohly I see. That could be a further variation of the device sharing mode. 
`allocationMode` is present in  ResourceClaim (devices->requests). Is it okay to use the same field name here (ResourceSlice: devices:basic)?

>    Shareable *bool

Reviewer 2: Thanks for pointing out that other "AllocationMode". I agree that it would be better to find a different name. How about `allocatable: Once` and `allocatable:  ManyTimes`? Enums start with a capital letter in the API.

If the stick with a boolean, then `allowMultipleAllocations: true` is my first choice.

>    Shareable *bool

Reviewer 5: `MultipleTimes` seems better than `ManyTimes` (is 2 many? probably not, but it is multiple...)

>    Shareable *bool

Reviewer 4: is `Request` always the thing a device is allocated to, and which this enables multiple of? is `OneRequest` / `MultipleRequests` clearer?

>    Shareable *bool

Reviewer 5: Yes, but see also https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5104/files#r2102747883

  - This value may differ from the originally requested amount—it is rounded up to the nearest valid capacity according to the policy (e.g., using Minimum + ⌈(Requested - Minimum)/ChunkSize⌉ × ChunkSize logic).
- If the device has enough remaining capacity to satisfy the consumed amount, constraint checks are applied. 
  In addition to the existing MatchAttribute, this proposal introduces a new constraint: `DistinctAttribute`, which ensures attribute uniqueness across allocated devices.
- Once all selection and constraint checks pass, the allocation is valid. The allocation result is updated with:
  - The shareable allocation identifier, which uniquely identifies the allocation on a shareable device.
  - The calculated consumed capacity, if a capacity sharing policy was applied.
    This consumed capacity is tracked as part of the device’s `allocatingCapacity`, 
    allowing it to be included in remaining capacity calculations for future allocations within the same call.
- Finally, the shareable allocation identifiers and consumed capacities from all internal results
  are propagated to the DeviceRequestAllocationResult.

> 

Reviewer 6: Feels like one explanation is missing: how does the scheduler reserve the resource on the shared device for the pod after `Allocate()`? 
1. Would that be at `Reserve()`? then how would the reservation be propagated to the calculation at `Allocate()`?
2. Would that be within `Allocate()`? Then, how would we release the reservation when the scheduling cycle fails?

Reviewer 3: IIUC allocation works the same to other DRA claims by placing DeviceRequestAllocationResult into ResourceClaim itself in `Allocate()`, which is later removed in `UnReserve()`

Reviewer 6: Currently, the reservation is done at `Reserve()`, not within `Allocate()` (i.e., `Filter()`), right?

Reviewer 3: Yes, `Allocate()` is called in `Filter` and calculates the proposed results per node. In `Reserve` the results for the node selected by scheduler are stored in the `ResouceClaim`

Author: @dom4ha @sanposhiho Yes, the changes are at PreFilter (NewAllocator) and Filter (Allocate). 

When initiating the new allocator (NewAllocator), in addition to the allocated device, we also need the allocated capacity information. 
When allocating (Allocate), in addition to the allocating device, we need to check and add information about allocating capacity to the allocator result. 

The rest mechanisms remain as-is as @dom4ha mentioned.

Reviewer 6: OK, understood.

  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [x] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [x] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> The enhancement allows a single device to be allocated to multiple requests.

Reviewer 5: I think it's worth noting that without this KEP, sharing is done by multiple containers and/or pods pointing to the *same* resource claim, and that resource claim has allocated the device. With the proposed KEP, independent resource claims (or requests within a claim) can allocate shares of the *same* underlying device. So, the API relationship for the current sharing (which will still be supported) is "a single device is only ever allocated to one resource claim" whereas with the sharing here "a single device may be allocated to multiple, independent claims or requests". In particular, those claims/requests may be from Pods and containers that are completely unrelated to one another, and even in different namespaces.

> By default, the device resources are shared freely without any guarantees.

Reviewer 5: This is the current behavior, actually. You can point multiple pods at the same resource claim (in the same namespace), or multiple containers at the same request within a claim. But it's something the user must explicitly do. With this KEP, users just ask for capacity, and the platform manages the sharing.

> By default, the device resources are shared freely without any guarantees.

Author: @liggitt I updated the summary section based on @johnbelamaric explanation above and add clarification about the default (shareable devices with no sharing policy) in this commit: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5104/commits/97eebfb53735bc77ef7e0ec89dcb66a932ba27c3.

The resource is not dedicated to any single request.
A specific resource is considered to have limited or guaranteed sharing only if a sharing policy is specified.
The device can be allocated until all available limited resources are consumed by requests.

To achieve this, this KEP introduces
- a new device field to distinguish between “shareable” and “unshareable” devices,
- a capacity-aware scheduling mechanism that allows limiting or guaranteeing the shareable device capacity,
- a new capacity requirement field in the device request of the resource claim,
- a new consumed capacity field in the allocation result of the resource claim,
- a distinct attribute constraint to prevent allocating the same shareable device in the same claim multiple times.

Relations to other KEPs:

> - [KEP 4815](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4815): The partitioned devices can be a shareble device or have mutually exclusive partitions where one partition is shareable and the other is not.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [KEP 4815](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4815): The partitioned devices can be a sharable device or have mutually exclusive partitions where one partition is shareable and the other is not.
```

The select condition `device.shareable == true/false` is used to identify to select the device with a `shareable` property or not.

The enhancement also adds a `SharingPolicy` field to `DeviceCapacity`.
This field specifies how the capacity can be shareable between different requests.
The sharing policy can either specify a range of valid values or a discrete set of them.
Each policy has a default value, either explicitly or implicitly.

Users can define specific per-device resource requests through the newly added `CapacityRequests` field in the `DeviceRequest`. Each contains a minimum required device capacity.
If the capacity is consumable, the amount available for allocation is determined
by subtracting the aggregated allocation results of current claims from the device's capacity as defined in the resource slice.
The remaining amount will be used solely by the allocator and will not be reflected in the resource slice.
The calculation of capacity requirements will round the requested capacity up to the nearest valid amount,
based on the capacity's sharing policy.

> If users do not specify a capacity request for consumable capacity, the default consumed value will be applied.

Reviewer 5: So, devices marked "shareable" are NOT consumable in their entirety, unless you request all capacity? Or do you have to specifically ask for a "share" vs a "whole device"?

In other words, if I have an existing cluster that publishes a bunch of devices, I cannot simply upgrade my driver and mark all devices as shareable, because requests that *previously allocated entire devices* will now *allocate only the default capacities*? I am not sure that's what we want.

Reviewer 5: I think instead we may want to consider any request without `capacityRequests` as a request for a "whole device". That could be satisfied by either a non-shareable device, or by a shareable device with no other users. In either case, once the whole device is allocated, no shares will be given out.

Reviewer 5: Ok, so, you want to be able to have a shared device that can be used without explicitly consuming any capacity. Hmm. I wonder if that can be handled with another `Allocatable` (`Shareable`) value? Something like:

`Allocatable`:
 - `Once` - current, whole device behavior
 - `Unlimited`  - share without consuming capacity
 - `CapacityControlled` - share, but only if `capacityRequests` are used in the claim

One problem I see is that if there is more than one `Unlimited` device, it will always pick the first one, which means you'll end up with the others never used. Also, I don't like the idea of "unlimited" sharing of anything. Even for nodes, there is a pod limit. Maybe instead something like:

`Allocatable` (or maybe `SharingMode` with subsequent changes to the value names?):
 - `Once` - current, whole device behavior
 - `UseCountControlled`  - share up to X times (X specified in another per-device field)
 - `CapacityControlled` - share, but only if `capacityRequests` are used in the claim

Essentially `UseCountControlled` is equivalent to `CapacityControlled` but with an implicit "use counter" that doesn't need to be (and cannot be) requested by the user.

Reviewer 3: > In other words, if I have an existing cluster that publishes a bunch of devices, I cannot simply upgrade my driver and mark all devices as shareable, because requests that previously allocated entire devices will now allocate only the default capacities? I am not sure that's what we want.

+1 I also think the shareable bit should not change the semantic of the existing fields without need of adding extra explicit information bit that a certain device becomes shareable in an unlimited way.

> One example is that we define simple shareable network card without any consumable capacity. 

In such case the sharing policy may explicitly allow unlimited sharing, so I'd rather see this an exceptional rather than the default case.

> Also, I don't like the idea of "unlimited" sharing of anything. Even for nodes, there is a pod limit.

Unlimited sharing may be useful in expressing scheduling constraints in the form of ResourceClaims shared between multiple pods. Such ResourceClaims could represent topology domains (like zones, racks or machines) and the constraint that a user may want to put is to use only one zone for all these pods, or in the opposite case, different zones if spreading effect is desired. This is just an idea and I admit that it requires more in depth thinking. In general ResourceClaims seem to already provide similar implicit topology constraints whenever the claim is shared between several pods.

Reviewer 4: > UseCountControlled is equivalent to CapacityControlled but with an implicit "use counter" that doesn't need to be (and cannot be) requested by the user.

That could already be accomplished with a synthetic "count" capacity with a sharing policy that defaulted claims to `1` and only allowed them to request `1`, right? I'm not sure what another mode buys us here.

   // DiscreteValues defines a set of acceptable quantity values in consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ValidSharingValues
   DiscreteValues *CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete

> CapacityControlled - share, but only if capacityRequests are used in the claim

I thought we wanted device sharing to be transparent to requests that had no opinion about capacityRequests, with defaults filled in according to the device class author

Author: Not sure I understand correctly, I think the idea to have Allocatable as a count (may validate > 0) also makes sense to me if we want to get rid of unlimited sharing.

Allocatable: 1 = Once mode (default)
Allocatable: N = UseCountControlled mode

And, no Unlimited sharing mode.

> CapacityControlled - share, but only if capacityRequests are used in the claim

Is this mean we assume define no capacityRequests  = request all resources? Actually, in my previous version I used to set this assumption and we got the conclusion that it might cause an implicit behavior and confused when mixing consumable and non-consumable capacities so I set explicit default value instead. 

I think CapacityControlled should be always applied when sharing policy is defined.

As mentioned in the above comment, we can change a device to shareable while keeping the default behavior to get a whole device by explicitly setting the sharingPolicy to maximum consumable capacity. 
Alternatively, this also gives flexibility to other device drivers to define their own default behavior (when capacityRequests defined) too.

Reviewer 5: What I would like to ensure is that existing resource claims do not start behaving differently if the resource slice flips the "shareable" bit. In other words, I want a way to enable shareability in existing clusters, without messing up existing workloads. So, maybe the right way to figure out how to do this is to write the request yaml for each of these scenarios:

* Request a whole device, when devices are not shareable
* Request a whole device, when devices are shareable
* Request a share of a device, where you do not want to explicitly ask for some capacity
* Request a share of a device using capacity consumption of ALL consumable capacity types (not necessarily the full value of any of them, but a just all of the types that are consumable)
* Request a share of a device using capacity consumption using SOME of the consumable types
* Request a share of a device using capacity consumption when no shareable devices exist, but a whole device can satisfy the request

Then think through how you go from "not shareable" to "shareable", and make sure the behavior of these requests does not change.

Author: @johnbelamaric Thank you for the clarification of the use cases. They are very useful. 
I will update the KEP to add yaml for all scenario you listed above and also mentioned about do not change the user-side resource claim behavior when flipping the shareable property bit of the devices.

Author: @dom4ha 

Actually, I started this KEP with the assumption that all capacities are consumable if it is shareable device and then changed to decouple the concept of allow sharing on multiple requests and the concept of consumable capacity to support the mixed capacity based on the discussion in the community call. 

When considering that device is already able to be shared among multiple pods by using the same claim, this KEP is only adding a flag to allow it to be shared on different resource claims (requests) by introducing a share ID field in the allocation result. The as-is behavior of capacity regardless of device are shared or not is not consumable. 

In my opinion, the device driver should be the component that knows whether it can handle the capacity as consumable or not. For example, if the network driver doesn't include the ability to limit bandwidth, it should not be able to guarantee the bandwidth capacity. 

In my understanding, what @johnbelamaric mentioned is when resourceclaims do not include the capacity which leads to another discussion and potential extension which I listed in the alternative section.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if I was clear. By "entirely consumable" I mean that a request with capacity X (or without capacity request) allocates whole device of capacity Y only when X<Y. IIUC this is the current behavior without sharing.

So when a device becomes sharable, but a device capacity does not specify neither a default value nor sharing policy, we could preserve the current behavior (allocate entire device, so no change to the current behavior). To share a resource unlimited, the default value would have to be explicitly set to 0.

So the shareable logic would be:
- if requested X < Y or nothing requested, and no default => allocate whole device
- if requested X < Y, and there is default => consume X
- if nothing requested, and there is default => consume default (or nothing if default = 0 to achieve unlimited sharing)

I think it would be

Author: @dom4ha 

I see that you mean _no default sharing policy_ = _implicit sharing policy with default full capacity (Y)_
When allowMultipleAllocations (shareable) flag is enabled, all capacity becomes consumable with default = full capacity. And, if we want the capacity to be shared infinitely, we need to set sharing policy to be infinity (may be a boolean flag Infinity inside SharingPolicy). 

My concern is if there is no capacity defined, the allowMultipleAllocations flag will be meaningless unless we force driver to define at least one capacity with infinity capacity which is not trivial. In my opinion, having the driver to define default value of existing capacity to full capacity is better than expecting the driver to add a dummy capacity resource with infinity default to allow the infinity share. 

The concept of enabling the allowMultipleAllocations flag is to share the device multiple times, I believe that the expected behavior is not blocking the device to share with full capacity. Otherwise, the users should not set that flag at the first place.

Note that, for the allocated claim before enabling the flag will have no affect since there is no share ID set and it will be treated as-is (no one can share the allocated device before enabling the shareable flag).

There is always such a default because capacities without a policy are not consumable.

A shareable device can only be allocated once its consumability has been verified
and its attributes match the request's selectors and constraints.
The newly added `capacities` field in the `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` will be set when the allocation is successful.

### API enhancement
To enable this enhancement, the following API updates are proposed.

#### ResourceSliceSpec's Device

```go

// Device represents one individual hardware instance that can be selected based
// on its attributes. Besides the name, exactly one field must be set.
type Device struct {
...
   // Shareable marks whether the device is shareable.
   //
   // A device with shareable="true" can be allocated more than once,
   // and its capacity is shared, regardless of whether the CapacitySharingPolicy is defined or not.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   Shareable *bool
}

// DeviceCapacity describes a quantity associated with a device.
type DeviceCapacity struct {

>    // Value defines how much of a certain device capacity is available.

Reviewer 5: No. This is total capacity, it's not updated based on allocations. Allocations are stored in resource claim status and the "available" is reconstructed/cached in-memory in the scheduler. I think that's described in here somewhere...

   DiscreteValues *CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete

   // ValueRange defines an acceptable quantity value range in consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=SharingPolicy
   ValueRange *CapacitySharingPolicyRange
}

// CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete defines a set of discrete allowed capacity values.
// If Options is not provided, only default value is valid.
//
// - If the requested amount is not listed in the options, it is rounded up to the next higher valid value.
// - If the requested amount exceeds the maximum value in the available options, the request does not satisfy the policy,
//   and the device cannot be allocated.
type CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete struct {
    // Default specifies the default capacity to be used for a consumption request
    // if no value is explicitly provided.
    //
    // +required
    Default resource.Quantity

    // Options defines a list of additional valid capacity values that can be requested.
    // The Default must not be one of the Options.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Options []resource.Quantity
}

// CapacitySharingPolicyRange defines a valid range for consumable capacity values.
//

> // - If the requested amount is less than Minimum, it is rounded up to the Minimum value.

Reviewer 5: Yeah, not sure how to deal with that. Right now, quota is based on just "count". I don't think we're proposing a change of that here. If we add quota that is "total memory" etc., we have lots of quota things that can't be resolved at admission time.

// - If the requested amount is between Minimum and Maximum, ChunkSize is set,
//   and the amount does not align with the ChunkSize,
//   it will be rounded up to the next value matching Minimum + (n * ChunkSize).
// - If the requested or rounded amount exceeds Maximum (if set), the request does not satisfy the policy,
//   and the device cannot be allocated.
//
// - If ChunkSize is not set, the requested amount is used as-is, provided it falls within the range.
type CapacitySharingPolicyRange struct {
    // Minimum specifies the minimum capacity allowed for a consumption request.

>     // This also acts as the default if no value is specified.

Reviewer 4: is minimum always the sensible default? if so, why not choose the minimum of CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete.Options implicitly as well? it seems unusual to give one an explicit default and the other an implicit

    //
    // +required
    Minimum resource.Quantity

    // Maximum defines the upper limit for capacity that can be requested.
    //
    // +optional
    Maximum *resource.Quantity

    // ChunkSize defines the step size between valid capacity amounts within the range.
    // If set, requested amounts are rounded up to the nearest multiple of ChunkSize from the Minimum.
    //
    // +optional
    ChunkSize *resource.Quantity
}
```

#### ResourceClaimSpec's DeviceRequest

```go

type DeviceRequest struct {
...
   // CapacityRequests define resource requirements against each capacity.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity

>    CapacityRequests *CapacityRequirements

Reviewer 4: this is going under DeviceRequest, and not inside ExactDeviceRequest / DeviceSubRequest?

I thought that `FirstAvailable []DeviceSubRequest` allowed selection of wildly different devices ... if so, the CapacityRequests could be very different depending on which subrequest was matched, right?

Author: @liggitt Thank you. I need to update the KEP according to the change on API introduced by [KEP 4816](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/4c66da9cbf355ff618642aea3d98d17111311646/keps/sig-scheduling/4816-dra-prioritized-list). Here is the commit: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5104/commits/55fa6bf17edb358bf49ddcd4c22de65938b0082c.

Reviewer 2: To answer @liggitt's question: I think this belongs into `ExactDeviceRequest` and `DeviceSubRequest` as in the KEP now, because then a prioritized list can have different alternatives which differ in how much capacity they request.

Having `CapacityRequests` in `DeviceRequest` would force all of them to use same capacity.

}

// CapacityRequirements defines the capacity requirements for a specific device request.
type CapacityRequirements struct {
    // Minimum defines the minimum amount of each device capacity required for the request.
    //
    // If the capacity has a sharing policy, this value is rounded up to the nearest valid amount
    // according to that policy. The rounded value is used during scheduling to determine how much capacity to consume.
    //
    // If the quantity does not have a sharing policy, this value is used as an additional filtering
    // condition against the available capacity on the device.
    // This is semantically equivalent to a CEL selector with

>     // `device.quantity[<domain>].<name>.compareTo(<minimum quantity>) >= 0`.

Reviewer 4: a little orthogonal, but would we be happy with someone using a CEL selector like that, or would we want them to guard it to make it safe using CEL optionals and a default of 0 to do this comparison? If so, let's get in the habit of putting CEL in docs we'd be happy with someone copy/pasting.

Also, is this `device.capacity` instead of `device.quantity`?

```
device.?capacity[<domain>].<name>.value.orValue(quantity("0")).compareTo(<minimum quantity>) >= 0
```

    //
    // +optional

>    Minimum map[QualifiedName]resource.Quantity

Reviewer 4: are the values here required to be >0?

Reviewer 5: It should not be an integer, it should be the standard Quantity

}

// DeviceConstraint must have exactly one field set besides Requests.
type DeviceConstraint struct {
	...
   // DistinctAttribute requires that all devices in question have this
   // attribute and that its type and value are unique across those devices.
   //
   // This acts as the inverse of MatchAttribute.
   //
   // This constraint is used to avoid allocating multiple requests to the same shareable device

>    // by ensuring attribute-level differentiation.

Reviewer 4: Is there an example scenario where allocating multiple requests to the same device while satisfying all the requested capacities would be problematic, but it allocating requests from different resourceclaims to the same device would be ok? I'm trying to understand the use case for this (what breaks without this)

Reviewer 5: My understanding of the primary use case here is spread for availability - "give me two network interfaces but make sure they are allocated out of two separate physical NICs".

Reviewer 4: ok... I can see how that's useful ... is that related to sharing?

Reviewer 5: Not super directly as far as I can tell...thus my comment in [here](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5104#discussion_r2100678577).

Reviewer 4: I guess this KEP makes it newly possible for the same device to be allocated to multiple requests in the same ResourceClaim, and without this, the claim cannot prevent that, so it *is* vaguely related

   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ConstraintType

>    DistinctAttribute *FullyQualifiedName

Reviewer 4: Is a single value here sufficient? In the context of this KEP, this seems focused on avoiding matching multiple requests to the same device (so would use some unique device identity attribute, presumably), but are there other scenarios where spreading would be desired that would involve more than one attribute? Normally, topology-type things are multi-dimensional.

It might be worth asking someone from scheduling to take a peek at this bit to see if it is generally useful ... this reminds me a lot of the `{required,preferred} {affinity,anti-affinity}` scheduling directives in pod spec

Reviewer 5: matchAtttribute is a slice, I would expect the same here.

Reviewer 5: Oh, take that back. You list multiple constraints, in order, each with one matchAttribute to do that.

So, you could do the same here. You could even mix them "make sure they are in the same pcieRoot, but not the same physical device" could be expressed with two constraints.

Reviewer 4: ah, ok

}

```

#### ResourceClaimStatus's DeviceRequestAllocationResult

```go
type ResourceClaimStatus struct {
  ...
	// +optional
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=driver
	// +listMapKey=device
	// +listMapKey=pool

> 	// +listMapKey=shareUID

Reviewer 4: if shareUID is optional with no default, I don't think it can be used as a listMapKey

Reviewer 2: Nil would have to be treated like "". Is that supported?

I was wondering about this earlier. I then looked at what the ManagedFields for this look like and it seemed that it should be possible to extend the set of map keys, but I don't think I went as far as using SSA and JSON patching.

The less risky approach might be to turn `ShareUID *string` into `ShareUID string`, even if that means always storing it.

Either way, we need tests. @sunya-ch: it is possible to pre-populate etcd with the dump of this object as it existed in 1.33, then use the updated type for operations, but I can't provide more guidance because I've not done it before. I can look into testing this.

Author: @pohly Based on https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/server-side-apply/#merge-strategy that the key fields must be scalars, I think I need to change it to string.

Reviewer 2: A related question: can we add the new field directly after the other keys where it logically belongs or does it have to be at the end because of the incremented protobuf index?

The order matters in some circumstances (pretty-printing an in-memory object, for example).

Reviewer 2: Indeed, SSA fails without a default value:
```
            failed to create typed patch object (testdra-all-resourceclaimdevicestatus-5d6xm/my-pod-my-resource; resource.k8s.io/v1beta1, Kind=ResourceClaim): .status.devices: element 0: associative list with keys has an element that omits key field "shareUID" (and doesn't have default value)
            {
                ErrStatus: 
                    code: 500
                    message: 'failed to create typed patch object (testdra-all-resourceclaimdevicestatus-5d6xm/my-pod-my-resource;
                      resource.k8s.io/v1beta1, Kind=ResourceClaim): .status.devices: element 0: associative
                      list with keys has an element that omits key field "shareUID" (and doesn''t have
                      default value)'
                    metadata: {}
                    status: Failure,
            }
```

It works when using
```Go
	// +default=""
	// +optional
	ShareUID *string `json:"shareUID" protobuf:"bytes,7,rep,name=shareUID"`
```

But then we might as well simply use
```Go
	ShareUID string `json:"shareUID" protobuf:"bytes,7,rep,name=shareUID"`
```

This makes it consistent with the other keys.

@liggitt: is this last option acceptable for a feature-gated field?

Test and different alternatives in https://github.com/pohly/kubernetes/pull/new/dra-resourceclaim-status-consumable-capacity

Reviewer 2: It gets more complicated. I added a test case for "ResourceClaim created in 1.32, SSA used after adding the new map key" to my branch (`TestDRA/all/DeviceStatusWithConsumableCapacity`).

Updating an existing map entry works. Deleting one doesn't.

After the update by "manager-1", the managed fields look like this:
```
                    <[]v1.ManagedFieldsEntry | len:4, cap:4>: 
                        - apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
                          fieldsType: FieldsV1
                          fieldsV1:
                            f:status:
                              f:devices:
                                k:{"device":"my-device","driver":"three","pool":"global"}:
                                  .: {}
                                  f:device: {}
                                  f:driver: {}
                                  f:networkData:
                                    f:interfaceName: {}
                                  f:pool: {}
                          manager: manager-2
                          operation: Apply
                          subresource: status
                          time: "2025-05-27T14:08:37Z"
                        - apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
                          fieldsType: FieldsV1
                          fieldsV1:
                            f:status:
                              f:devices:
                                k:{"device":"another-device","driver":"two","pool":"global","shareUID":""}:
                                  .: {}
                                  f:device: {}
                                  f:driver: {}
                                  f:networkData:
                                    f:interfaceName: {}
                                  f:pool: {}
                          manager: manager-1
                          operation: Apply
                          subresource: status
                          time: "2025-05-28T07:08:46Z"
                        - apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
                          fieldsType: FieldsV1
                          fieldsV1:
                            f:spec:
                              f:devices:
                                f:requests: {}
                          manager: dra.test
                          operation: Update
                          time: "2025-05-27T14:08:37Z"
                        - apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
                          fieldsType: FieldsV1
                          fieldsV1:
                            f:status:
                              f:allocation:
                                .: {}
                                f:devices:
                                  .: {}
                                  f:results: {}
                              f:devices:
                                .: {}
                                k:{"device":"my-device","driver":"one","pool":"global"}:
                                  .: {}
                                  f:conditions: {}
                                  f:device: {}
                                  f:driver: {}
                                  f:networkData:
                                    .: {}
                                    f:hardwareAddress: {}
                                    f:interfaceName: {}
                                    f:ips: {}
                                  f:pool: {}
                          manager: dra.test
                          operation: Update
                          subresource: status
                          time: "2025-05-27T14:08:37Z"
```

`"shareUID":""` was added for "manager-1". "manager-2" indeed has the map entry:
```
                    {
                       "driver": "three",
                       "pool": "global",
                       "device": "my-device",
                       "conditions": null,
                       "networkData": {
                          "interfaceName": "net-3"
                       }
                    }
```

When "manager-2" sends an apply configuration without that entry, the managed fields get updated such that "manager-2" doesn't appear anymore at all because it has no fields left. So far, so good. But the map entry doesn't get removed and now effectively has no owner anymore.

This looks like a deficiency in SSA to me. Extending the set of map keys probably hasn't come up before, but IMHO is something that we should support.

cc @jpbetz 

Can we do it differently? Suppose we extend the meaning of the "device" field when used as key from `<device name>` to `<device name>[/<share UID>]`. This is something that we can enforce through feature-gated validation. Some care will be needed to allow it for existing entries when the feature is off and only prevent it for new entries. It is backward-compatible because device names are DNS labels and thus must not contain the new slash separator. 

With that approach, no new map key is needed.

Author: @pohly Thank you so much for doing the test! I like the idea to extend the device name. We can use something like `@sid:` as a known delimit to determine a share device.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about `@sid:` - is that a prefix? I don't think we need that. Any device name string including a slash can be recognized as referring to a device share.

> We may keep as-is device name in DeviceRequestAllocationResult and add ShareUID *types.UID.

Let's be consistent. If we use `<device name>/<share ID>` for `AllocatedDeviceStatus.Device`, then `DeviceRequestAllocationResult.Device` should use the same.

Reviewer 2: My suggestion is this:
- Without the feature gate, the device name must be a DNS label for new entries.
- With the feature gate or for existing entries, it must be a DNS label or `<dns label>/<share ID>`.

We should also reconsider how we define `<share ID>`. We picked UID which implies that it is globally unique (property of a UID). But then this concatenation is always pretty long because UIDs are long.

I'm leaning towards changing the definition of "share ID" to:
- Must be a DNS label.
- Must be unique *among all  currently allocated shares of the device* - i.e. not globally unique.

How the scheduler generates such an ID is not part of the API. A simple approach would be to have a global running counter which gets incremented for each new share, with checking that the next value doesn't conflict. We can throw in a "share-" prefix, just for the sake of readability.

Author: @pohly Thank you. I agree that it is clear and clean. I will update the KEP in that direction.

	// +featureGate=DRAResourceClaimDeviceStatus
	Devices []AllocatedDeviceStatus `json:"devices,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,4,opt,name=devices"`
}

type DeviceRequestAllocationResult struct {
  ...

   // ShareUID uniquely identifies the specific allocation result of the shareable device.

>    // Set only when allocation is on a shareable device.

Reviewer 4: What is this the UID of? What is it used for?

Reviewer 4: This definitely needs more of an explanation for how it is used, what it means (and clearer documentation for whether this corresponds to a Kubernetes API uid or not ... "uid" is somewhat overloaded as a term in the API)

- Before allocation proceeds, existing selection criteria (defined by `alloc.isSelectable`) are evaluated. 
  These include the class selector and request selector.
- A new `device.shareable` key is introduced in the CEL selector,
  enabling policies and constraints to recognize whether a device supports shareable allocation.
- If a device is considered selectable, the `CmpRequestOverCapacity` function is invoked to verify 
  whether the consumed capacity would exceed the device's remaining capacity. 
  The remaining capacity is calculated based on the sum of already allocated and currently allocating capacities.
  - consumed capacity is derived from the requested amount specified in the resource claim, adjusted by the device’s capacity sharing policy, if defined.
  - This value may differ from the originally requested amount—it is rounded up to the nearest valid capacity according to the policy (e.g., using Minimum + ⌈(Requested - Minimum)/ChunkSize⌉ × ChunkSize logic).
- If the device has enough remaining capacity to satisfy the consumed amount, constraint checks are applied. 

>   In addition to the existing MatchAttribute, this proposal introduces a new constraint: `DistinctAttribute`, which ensures attribute uniqueness across allocated devices.

Reviewer 5: Do we need this feature in this KEP? I mean, is it necessary for the use cases? If so that is fine, but if not we could potentially do it in a separate KEP just to reduce scope. I am OK either way.

Reviewer: Wouldn't this be possible to achieve the same with the [KEP-5254 - Constraints with CEL](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/5254)? CEL checking if the devices have the same/distinct attributes would be more generic than `DistinctAttribute`

Reviewer 5: Yes, but that requires writing CEL. I think it's nice to have the symmetry with matchAttributes without writing CEL.

There are also two different ideas we have discussed with respect to #5254.

1) I think the one in the KEP is a single CEL expression evaluated over the entire set of devices. This could achieve the distinct attributes but iterating over a set is pretty advanced CEL.
2) A "matchExpression" which works just like matchAttribute but instead of reading an attribute, evaluates a per-device expression. The results of that expression would then have to be the same for every device in the set.

If we do 2), then we can also do a `distinctExpression`. Though I believe 1) is the thing we are actually doing in that KEP.

  - The calculated consumed capacity, if a capacity sharing policy was applied.
    This consumed capacity is tracked as part of the device’s `allocatingCapacity`, 
    allowing it to be included in remaining capacity calculations for future allocations within the same call.
- Finally, the shareable allocation identifiers and consumed capacities from all internal results
  are propagated to the DeviceRequestAllocationResult.

### Examples

#### Shareable DeviceClass's selector

```yaml
selectors:
  - cel:
      expression: |-
        device.shareable == true
```

#### ResourceClaim with capacity requirement

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
...
spec:
  driver: guaranteed-cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io
  devices:
  - name: eth1
    basic:
      shareable: true
      attributes:
        name:
          string: "eth1"
      capacity:
        bandwidth:
          sharingPolicy:
            range:
              minimum: "1Mi"
              chunkSize: "8"
          value: "10Gi"
```

#### ResourceClaim's request

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: nic
      deviceClassName: qos-aware-shared.device.x-k8s.io
      capacities:
        minimum:

>           bandwidth: 5Gi

Reviewer 5: How is this name handled? In the Go above, it's a `QualifiedName`. So, if it's not qualified here, what domain do we use to qualify it? Does it vary based on the underlying device being looked at (uses the domain from that device)? Or is it `k8s.io` or equivalent?

**Alternative:**

Introduce explicit flags in the resource request:

- AllowShared: Opt-in to allow shareable devices.
- RequireShared: Only allow shareable devices.

(Default: shareable devices are excluded unless explicitly allowed.)

Pros:
- Does not affect unshareable device selection.
- Easier for users to understand and configure, reducing the risk of mistakes.
- More user-friendly than writing CEL expressions manually.

Cons:
- Adds complexity to the allocation logic for shareable devices.
- Introduces an additional field in resource requests.
- May require an abstraction layer if more device features are added in the future.
- Less explicit and expressive than CEL for advanced use cases.

### Preventing Same Shareable Device from Being Allocated Multiple Times in the Same Claim

**Current Approach:**

Introduce a new API-level constraint: DistinctAttribute, ensuring devices in a single claim have unique attribute values.

**Alternative:**

The scheduler enforces this behavior implicitly—never allocate the same shareable device multiple times to the same resource claim.

Pros:
- Avoids any API changes—logic handled internally.

Cons:

> - Doesn’t support cases where a pod legitimately needs multiple fractions of capacity from the same shareable device.

Reviewer 5: Do we know of any such use cases?

users specifies their required guaranteed bandwidth. Otherwise, the default value defined by the DRA driver is applied.

### Risks and Mitigations

- The requested amount in the resource claim may not satisfy the capacity sharing policy,
  especially if the requested amount exceeds the maximum allowed consumption.

  This scenario should be handled similarly to other scheduling issues, such as when the request exceeds the allocatable capacity. 
  In such cases, the allocation fails and the pod remains pending.

- The driver includes both shareable and unshareable devices. There is a risk that a user may be allocated a shareable device
  (e.g., a shareable network device) and accidentally configure it with the HostDevice CNI plugin.
  This would move the device from the host into the user's pod, preventing other users from accessing the shareable device.

  **Mitigation:**
  - Administrators should define clear device classes for shareable and unshareable devices to prevent such misallocations.

## Design Details

This enhancement introduces a `shareable` field within the `Device` of the ResourceSlice
to mark whether the device is a shareable device.

> The shareable device can be assigned to more than one request if it satisfies the selection criteria and constraints.

Author: @mskrocki  Yes, with current design, shareable device can be used as a whole when at least one capacity is consumable (defining sharingPolicy). Examples of consumable capacity are the number of virtual devices allowed, or the bandwidth. If the resource claim requests the total available number, the other resource claim cannot get the same device. 

I also consider the same use case. What I'm planning to do is have driver set consumable capacity

```yaml
capacity:
  vlan:
    sharingPolicy:
      default: 1000
      range:
        minimum: 1
        maximum: 1000
    value: 1000
```

To get whole device,

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: host-device
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: nic
       exactly:
         deviceClassName: qos-aware-shared.device.x-k8s.io
         # can omit the three following lines as the default value will be applied
         capacityRequests:
           minimum:
             vlan: 1000 
```

To get single macvlan

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: macvlan
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: nic
       exactly:
         deviceClassName: qos-aware-shared.device.x-k8s.io
         capacityRequests:
           minimum:
             vlan: 1 
```

> The shareable device can be assigned to more than one request if it satisfies the selection criteria and constraints.

Reviewer 7: I see, thou then you have to specify `capacityRequests` in one the cases (depending on the default value).

I dont think I found this info in the text, could you add it?

> The shareable device can be assigned to more than one request if it satisfies the selection criteria and constraints.

Author: @mskrocki Thank you. I will update the KEP and you may be also interested in relevant discussion in this comment: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5104#discussion_r2100686267.

The master field in the CNI config can be filled according to the selected device by the CNI DRA driver.

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: macvlan
      deviceClassName: vlan-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
      resources:
        requests:
          bandwidth: "1Gi"
    config:
    - requests:
      - macvlan
      opaque:
        driver: cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io
        parameters: # CNIParameters with the GVK, interface name and CNI Config (in YAML format).
          apiVersion: cni.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
          kind: CNI
          ifName: "net1"
          config:
            cniVersion: 1.0.0
            name: net1
            plugins:
            - type: macvlan
              mode: bridge
              ipam:
                type: host-local
                ranges:
                - - subnet: 10.10.1.0/24
```

#### Story 2
A user reserves that fractions of memory for the virtual GPU.

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: vgpu0
      deviceClassName: vgpu.nvidia.com
      resources:
        requests:

>           memory: "10Gi"

Reviewer 8: How should users think about the requests specified here vs selectors that reference capacity?

Author: @mortent 
I think this will be similar to the node selection level where we have node selector to filter (select) the device and we have resource request to request device within the node. In DRA device level, selector is used for filtering the device while resource here is to request for the resource of that device.

Reviewer 8: Yeah, I agree that is probably the most logical way to think about it. But it probably also means that the selector will be evaluated against the full device and not the logical "shared device". It might be a bit surprising as it means that using a selector that is smaller than the request means the claim can never be satisfied, while it also lets users do things like request 10Gb of bandwidth from a device that must have at least 40Gb.

```

#### Story 3
A user specifies a sharted device by some attributes such as name.

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: net1
      deviceClassName: vlan-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
      selectors:
      - cel:
          expression: "device.attributes['vlan-cni.networking.x-k8s.io'].name == 'eth1'"
      resources:
        requests:
          bandwidth: "1Gi"
```

#### Story 4
A user reserves the shared device and blocks the others to get the same shared device.

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: net1
      deviceClassName: vlan-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
      resources:
        all: "true"
```

#### Story 5
A user defines resource limits when the device driver supports a burstable use.
The CNI DRA driver can add a chained bandwidth CNI based on the bandwidth request.

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: net1
      deviceClassName: vlan-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
      resources:

>         requests:

Reviewer 8: We should probably also clarify here how shared devices works with the abstract pools introduced in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-scheduling/4815-dra-partitionable-devices. If part of a shared device is allocated, I would assume that means that all the `consumesCapacity` specified for the device would be considered "used" by the capacity pool?

Reviewer 5: Yes. if any part of a partition is used, then that partition is in-use and allocated

Author: I have updated the [KEP design detail's scheduling enhancement](https://github.com/sunya-ch/k8s-enhancements/tree/dra-dynamic-provision/keps/sig-scheduling/5075-dra-consumable-capacity#scheduling-enhancement). The shared device will not included in allocatedDevice and allocatingDevice to allow multiple-claim allocation. Additionally, with consumable capacity, scheduler will handle allocated devices with allocatedCapacity and allocatingCapacity instead.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

This enhancement introduces a `shared` field within the `BasicDevice` of the ResourceSlice
to mark whether the device is a shared device.
If the device is marked as a shared device, all values in the capacity field are considered as consumable.
If there is no capacity defined, the device is considered as having an **infinite** sharable capacity.

Users can define specific per-device resource requests through
the newly added `ResourceRequest` field in the `DeviceRequest` of the `ResourceClaim`.

> In a resource request, users may define `Requests` and `Limits` or either of them

Reviewer 3: The KEP is supposed to be pretty generic, so I think it should mention other typical use cases, so that we could have a better picture what kind of resources could be consumed in this way.

I suspect that some nomenclature is already settled down, but the part that is a bit risky to me is use of word `limit` to describe burstable consumption. If we consider memory as a consumable resource, then we should sum up limits, instead of requests.

I think it should be super clear which value decreases available capacity. If we need additional concepts (like burstable use), are we sure that these concepts are generic enough and have a future-proof naming?

Reviewer 5: I think the current scheduling code works off of *requests*, not limits. Limits are only enforced by the kubelet. But maybe @dom4ha you can double check? We should do whatever we already do...

except the allocation mode `AllowShared` has been set.
For allocationMode=AllowShared, both non-sharable devices and shared devices can be allocated.

A shared device can only be allocated once its consumability has been verified
and its attributes match the request's selectors and constraints.
The newly added `resources` field in the `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` will be set when the allocation is successful.
A device can be shared (allocated) to different pods. 
However, claims from the same pod cannot allocate shares from the same shared device.

### API enhancement
To enable this enhancement, the following API updates are proposed.
#### ResourceSliceSpec's BasicDevice

```go

// BasicDevice defines one device instance.
type BasicDevice struct {
...
   // Shared marks whether the device is shared.
   // The device with shared="true" can be allocated to more than one claim,
   // and all value in capacity is considered as consumable.
   // If there is no capacity defined,
   // the device is considered as having an infinity sharable capacity.
   // +optional
   // +default=false
   // +featureGate=ConsumableCapacity

>    Shared bool `json:"shared" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=shared"`

Reviewer 8: This should be a pointer, ref https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api-conventions.md#optional-vs-required

}
```

#### ResourceClaimSpec's DeviceRequest

```go
// ResourceRequest is a per-device resource request specification.
type ResourceRequest struct {
   // All marks requesting all resources from the shared device.
   // Regardless of the number of capacity defined in the shared device, 
   // this flag will block the allocation of the shared device from the other claims.
   // +optional
   // +default=false

>    All bool `json:"all" protobuf:"bytes,1,name=all"`

Reviewer 8: The `All` and `Requirements` fields are mutually exclusive, so we should add a `+oneOf` directive.

   // Requirements define specific values of resource requirements of the device request.

>    // If all="true", this field is ignored.

Reviewer 8: Rather than saying the field will be ignored, we want to validate that only one of the two fields are set.

Author: API design changed and all field is removed.

  - [ ] (R) Ensure GA e2e tests meet requirements for [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> This KEP is an extended usecase from the partitionable device [KEP-4815: DRA: Add support for partitionable devices](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/4815-dra-partitionable-devices).

Reviewer 5: s/usecase/use case/

The enhancement enables a shared device allocation with consumable capacity values.

> A shared device can be allocated to more than one resource claims with pre-device resource requests.

Reviewer 5: s/claims/claim/
s/pre/per/

The configured information specific to the generated device should be at the ResourceClaim, not the ResourceSlice. 
However, the device in the ResourceClaim is now present, even though the device is listed in the ResourceSlice, and there is no attribute to differentiate between the master device and the actual share of the device.

There are also similar use cases for requesting the device based on a specific root or device type in other contexts,
including [Peer Pods](https://github.com/confidential-containers/cloud-api-adaptor/blob/main/docs/architecture.md)
and [Composable Disaggregated Infrastructure (CDI)](https://www.wwt.com/article/an-introduction-to-composable-disaggregated-infrastructure).

This feature is also beneficial for the other sharable devices those are not with a scope of [KEP-4815](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4815).
For instance, this feature will be allow reserving memory fraction of virtual GPU in [the AWS virtual GPU device plugin](https://github.com/awslabs/aws-virtual-gpu-device-plugin) via DRA.
The number of shares can be limited if needed.

> ### Goals

Reviewer 8: So I think the main issue with the partitionable devices feature that this attempts to solve, is to make it possible to share capacity from a device without having to explicitly list every possible partition. We already know this can be very verbose in some situations (example in https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lXGfnrBixRIMW9ESa-mv09Kisb2myVFV_A3nqPJ4FCQ/edit?tab=t.0#bookmark=id.mmv8k6mzxscm). I think it might be useful to spell out more clearly here how this extends the already planned support for partitionable devices (which already allow for sharing devices and to some extent also on-demand sharing).

- Introduce an ability to allocating on-demand shared devices via DRA. This should cover the use cases of macvlan or ipvlan in a DRA driver for CNI and virtual accelerator devices with on-demand memory fraction.
- Enhance a capability of secondary networks to dynamically allocate secondary networks based on present availabilities such as bandwidth.

> - Leverage the enhancement of capacity consumption from [KEP-4815](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-node/4815-dra-partitionable-devices).

Reviewer 5: I don't think we need to refer to this here.

The capacity consumption in that case is between partitions of the devices.

The capacity consumption in this case is between claims.

The actual pools of capacity being consumed *are completely separate*. This is a layered approach. This current KEP should latch on to the "Device" layer. The partitionable KEP resource pools are a layer lower. The partitionable KEP enables the scheduler to calculate what "whole devices" to offer. That is orthogonal to whether or not that "whole device" can be shared and provides its own, allocatable resources.

For example, let's pretend there is a physical GPU (8 gpu cores, 10 Gi memory) that can support two hardware-level partitions: left (6 gpu cores, 8 Gi)  and right (2 gpu cores, 2 Gi). Suppose further that using software-level sharing, these types of GPUs can allocate individual GPU cores and GPU memory in 1GB blocks. You would use the features of the "partitionable" KEP to advertise:
- whole GPU, 8 gpu cores, 10 Gi gpu memory
- left GPU, 6 gpu cores, 8 Gi gpu memory
- right GPU, 2 gpu cores, 2 Gi gpu memory

The partitionable "shared resources" would allow the scheduler to:
- Withdraw "left" and "right" partitions from the available list when "whole" is allocated
- Withdraw "whole" from the available list when "left" or "right" is allocated

That's all it does. The users never see the "consumption" of resources - they only see "here is a list of devices, when I use this device, these other ones become unavailable".

In fact though, because of the software-level sharing, a user could point *multiple resource claims* at, say, the "right" GPU. The goal of this KEP is to regulate *that* sharing.

In this example (and in NVIDIA MIGs), the resources used for the partitioning *match* the resources advertised by the partitions. However, that is just a "coincidence". Our model allows the resources advertised by the device (and thus consumable in *this* KEP) to be completely distinct from the resources consumed internally to manage the partitioning scheme.

### Non-Goals

- Define driver-specific attributes and configs (such as CNI parameter config).
- Support network security policy.
- Add a flag to allow sharing device within the same pod (has no use case).

## Proposal

<!--
This is where we get down to the specifics of what the proposal actually is.
This should have enough detail that reviewers can understand exactly what
you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1
A user requests a secondary network based on their bandwidth demands without wanting to specify a device name nor present available bandwidth of each specific device. The DRA scheduler can dynamically select available devices based on their availability.

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
...
spec:
  driver: cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io
  devices:
  - name: eth1
    basic:
      attributes:
        name:
          string: "eth1"

>       consumableCapacity:

Reviewer 5: The reason capacity is separate from attributes is *because* it is consumable. So, this should just be listed under "capacity". If we think there will be things that can't be shared, we should have a flag or something. It's not clear to me if that should be at the *device* level, or at the individual *resource* level. If it's not consumable, maybe it should be an attribute?

Reviewer 2: The *current* capacities as defined in 1.32 without this KEP are not consumable. Yes, I still think they should have been attributes with a capacity value type, but you and Tim wanted them to be a separate field with the goal to extend the usage of that field later.

This KEP looks like that extension, so instead of `consumableCapacity` we should have:
```yaml
capacity:
   bandwidth:
     value: 10Gi
     consumable: true
```

I'm using a boolean here for the sake of simplicity. Usually from an API perspective, an enum is preferred because it can be extended later. But such a "type" enum is now a bit weird for "traditional" usage:
- `type: consumable` = new semantic
- `type: attribute` = traditional semantic, default if unset

Either way, we need a new field, which leads to the problem that the apiserver will drop it and thus "downgrades" the capacity to the traditional "attribute" semantic. The mitigation from https://docs.google.com/document/d/1sCfO4hJUUhZpzld-_wEZi85XqSclEVvjUfsEe2-duZs/edit?tab=t.0#bookmark=id.jkplkq9taqcd will have to be used by DRA drivers.

Author: @pohly Yes. I agree. We also discuss about this topic in our call today. 
I will update KEP correspondingly. 

You may find in the other discussion points we had from this doc too: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1U0u2uErpYcf-RooPEws5oDMiJ9kT2uDoWNjcWrLH224/edit?tab=t.btyzk7v0acfo

        bandwidth:
          value: 10Gi
---
kind: DeviceClass
metadata:
  name: vlan-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
```

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: macvlan
      deviceClassName: vlan-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
      allocationMode: Shared
      resources:
        requests:

>           bandwidth: "1Gi"

Reviewer 9: I do not understand how is this going to be related to eth1, what if there is eth2 and eth3 too?

Author: User can specify the device via the selection (such as specify device's attribute name = eth1). Additionally, DRA allows pod to dynamically allocate device based on its available resource such as bandwidth.The selected device information will be also sent to the driver then the network driver and configure the selected device.

Reviewer 8: I assume the idea here is to underspecify when possible, but be more specific if needed. So if there are also `eth2` and `eth3`, then leaving it like this means that any one of `eth1-3` will work. If that is not the case, then a selector is needed to further narrow down the eligible devices.

Reviewer 5: Yes exactly, Morten. We can "schedule" onto any of the underlying eth* devices. If we want a specific one - or one with a specific attribute (like network or trunking) - then that should be specified like any other selector.

    config:
    - requests:
      - macvlan
      opaque:
        driver: cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io
        parameters: # CNIParameters with the GVK, interface name and CNI Config (in YAML format).
          apiVersion: cni.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
          kind: CNI
          ifName: "net1"
          config:
            cniVersion: 1.0.0
            name: net1
            plugins:
            - type: macvlan
              master: eth0
              mode: bridge
              ipam:
                type: host-local
                ranges:
                - - subnet: 10.10.1.0/24
```

#### Story 2
A user reserves that fractions of memory for the virtual GPU.

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:

>     - name: vgpu0

Reviewer 8: Should this also set `allocationMode` to `Shared`?

Author: @johnbelamaric I have added `AllowShared` mode to cover a new Story 7 A user requests a device regardless of whether the device is sharable or not. 

For `AllowMultiple` and `AllowMultipleOrShared `, can we have that for a separate KEP?

Reviewer 8: So I'm not sure I follow why sharing implies <1. Wouldn't it be possible for someone to request more than one device, but also accept that one or more of those devices might be shared? I'm not sure if it makes sense in the network use-case, but it does seem like something that might be useful for other use-cases.

I'm also uncertain about adding an additional option for the `AllocationMode` enum. I think I agree that combining `AllocationMode: All` with shared devices shouldn't be possible, it still feels a bit strange to add the new `AllowShared` value. The current values `All` and `ExactCount` specify how many devices that will be allocated for the request, which seems separate from whether or not shared devices can be used to satisfy the claim.

Reviewer 5: > For `AllowMultiple` and `AllowMultipleOrShared `, can we have that for a separate KEP?

Yes, for sure. Although based on Morten's comment maybe we should think about other ways to specify this? Maybe `AllocationMode` isn't the right place? Do you have an alternative suggestion, @mortent ?

What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

This enhancement introduces the `consumableCapacity` field within the `BasicDevice` of the ResourceSlice. 
The consumableCapacity can be set to infinity.
Devices that have at least one consumableCapacity are considered to be shared devices.

Users can only claim a shared device using the newly added `Shared` allocation mode (`DeviceAllocationMode`). In other words, the shared device will be skipped in all other modes, while the unsharable device will be skipped in the Shared mode.

Users can define specific per-device resource requests through
the newly added resources field in the `DeviceRequest` of the `ResourceClaim`. 

> If the resources field is not specified, all consumable resources are assumed.

Author: I have changed the KEP design and implementation to always set default value for consumable spec. If user doesn't define the capacity request, it should use the defined default value instead of consuming all capacity.

A shared device will only be allocated once its consumability has been verified
and its attributes match the request's selectors and constraints.
"share" refers to amount of resources reserved or allocated to the claim request.
The newly added `allocatedShare` field in the `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` will be set when the allocation is successful.

> A device can be shared (allocated) to different pods. 

Author: Yes. A device in the same node can be shared to multiple pods. There will be multiple resource claim with the same device allocated but with different resource share. 
I will update and add "in the same node" in the sentence for clarification.

However, claims from the same pod cannot allocate shares from the same shared device.

### API enhancement
To enable this enhancement, the following API updates are proposed.
#### ResourceSliceSpec's BasicDevice

```go
type BasicDevice struct {
	Attributes         map[QualifiedName]DeviceAttribute
	Capacity           map[QualifiedName]DeviceCapacity

> 	ConsumableCapacity map[QualifiedName]DeviceConsumableCapacity

Reviewer 9: how does both maps are related? are capacities allowed to be on both places?

Author: Currently, the value in capacity is not used in allocation decision. I'm not sure the original purpose of the capacity so that I define a new field for consumable capacity to be used in allocation decision.

Reviewer 8: The `capacity` field specifies the available capacities for the device, so my intuition here is that we don't need a new `ConsumableCapacity` field. With the introduction of the `ConsumesCapacity` field in https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-scheduling/4815-dra-partitionable-devices, we make a distinction between the capacity a device consumes from the internal pool and the advertised capacity. Having three fields named `Capacity`, ConsumesCapacity` and `ConsumableCapacity` will probably get somewhat confusing.

}

// BasicDevice defines one device instance.
type BasicDevice struct {
  ...
	// ConsumableCapacity defines the set of capacities for this device,
	// which can be partially consumed and shared by more than one claim.
	// If at least one item is defined in this field, the device is considered as shared device
  // and can be allocated only with the `Shared` allocation mode.
  //
  // The maximum number of attributes, capacities, and consumable capactites combined is 32.
  //
  // +optional
  // +featureGate=ConsumableCapacity
  ConsumableCapacity map[QualifiedName]DeviceConsumableCapacity `json:"consumableCapacity,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,3,rep,name=consumableCapacity"`
}

// DeviceConsumableCapacity describes a consumable quantity associated with a device.
type DeviceConsumableCapacity struct {
  // InfinityResource marks no capacity limit.
  // If InfinityResource is set to true, Value will be ignored.
  //
  // +optional
  // +default=false

>   InfinityResource bool `json:"infinity" protobuf:"bytes,1,name=infinity"`

Reviewer 8: Do we need to advertise capacity if it is infinite? I would assume every device will have some kind of capacity that is finite and I would assume just listing those would be enough.

  // The value must be greater than zero if `infinity` is false.
  //
  // +optional
  Value resource.Quantity `json:"value" protobuf:"bytes,2,rep,name=value"`
}
```

#### ResourceClaimSpec's DeviceRequest

```go

const (
	DeviceAllocationModeExactCount = DeviceAllocationMode("ExactCount")
	DeviceAllocationModeAll        = DeviceAllocationMode("All")
	DeviceAllocationModeShared     = DeviceAllocationMode("Shared")
)

// DeviceClaim defines how to request devices with a ResourceClaim.
type DeviceRequest struct {
  ...

	// Resource is used only when the allocation mode is `Shared`.
	// Only the resource in ConsumableCapacity can be requested.
	// If the device is shared and this field is nil,
	// the default is to request all consumable capacity.
	//
	// +optional
	// +oneOf=AllocationMode
	// +featureGate=ConsumableCapacity
	Resources *ResourceRequest `json:"resources,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,7,opt,name=resources"`
}

// ResourceRequest is a per-device resource request specification.
type ResourceRequest struct {
	// All marks requesting all resource from the shared device.
	// If All is set to true, Quantity will be ignored.
	//
	// +optional
	// +default=false

> 	All bool `json:"all" protobuf:"bytes,1,name=all"`

Author: Mostly yes. `All` can be set only when the allocation mode is `Shared`.  
With Shared allocation mode on the shared device, the device will be first selected by selectors and lastly checked with constraints in the same way it works in the other allocation mode.
Regardless of `All` flag, what is added in allocation process is to check resource is still consumable. 
When `All` is set, only shared device with full resource (i.e., no share has been allocate) can be selected.

> 	All bool `json:"all" protobuf:"bytes,1,name=all"`

Author: @johnbelamaric I'm thinking that there are two actors of the system, device driver and user who creates a claim. The device driver is the one who decides whether the device is shared. However, user may want it all themselves. This flag will allow this use case. Also, in that case, user don't have to check the resource slice on how many capacity defined and request all items.

    - name: eth1
      basic:
        attributes:
          name:
            string: "eth1"
        consumableCapacity:
          bandwidth:
            value: "10Gi"
  ```
- ResourceSlice with an infinite consumable capacity (B type)
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
  kind: ResourceSlice
  ...
  spec:
    driver: cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io
    devices:
    - name: eth1
      basic:
        attributes:
          name:
            string: "eth1"
        consumableCapacity:
          ipvlan:
            infinity: true
          macvlan:
            infinity: true
  ```
- Combination of both types are also possible.
#### ResourceClaim
- ResourceClaim with a resource request (A-type ResourceSlice)
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1beta1
  kind: ResourceClaim
  ...
  spec:
    devices:
      requests:
      - name: net1
        deviceClassName: vlan-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
        resources:
          requests:
            bandwidth: "1Gi"
  ...
  status:
    reserveFor:
    - name: example-pod
      ...
    allocation:
      devices:
        results:
        - request: net1
          device: eth1
          allocatedShare:
            bandwidth: "1Gi"
  ```

> - ResourceClaim without a resource request (request full available device) (A-type ResourceSlice)

Reviewer 9: we can already do this, no? why do we need to create this exception in this model, so we have two ways of doing the same

      var consumable bool
      var err error

      if allocatedShare, found := alloc.allocatedShareCollection[deviceID]; found {
        consumable, err = allocatedShare.IsConsumable(request.Resources.Requests, consumableCapacity)
      } else {
        consumable, err = NewAllocatedShare().IsConsumable(request.Resources.Requests, consumableCapacity)
      }
      return consumable, err
    }
    ```

- add request's `resources` in `internalDeviceResult` for updating ResourceClaim status correspondingly

  ```go
  type internalDeviceResult struct {
    request     string
    id          DeviceID
    slice       *draapi.ResourceSlice
    resources   *map[resourceapi.QualifiedName]resource.Quantity
    adminAccess *bool
  }
  ```

  ```go
  func (a *Allocator) Allocate(ctx context.Context, node *v1.Node) (finalResult []resourceapi.AllocationResult, finalErr error) {
        ...
      for i, internal := range internalResult.devices {
        allocationResult.Devices.Results[i] = resourceapi.DeviceRequestAllocationResult{
          ...
          AllocatedShare: internal.resources,
        }
      }
  }
  ```

> ### Test Plan

Reviewer 9: this part is missing

Reviewer 2: Looks good and very thorough (thanks!) to me.

- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

The enhancement enables allocating sharable devices to more than one resource claims under consumable capacity of each per-device resource. 
To achieve that, this KEP introduces
- a new device field to distinguish between “shareable” and “unshareable” devices,
- a capacity-aware scheduling mechanism that allows limiting or guaranteeing the shared device capacity,
- a new capacity requirement field in the device request of the resource claim,
- a new consumed capacity field in the allocation result of the resource claim,
- a distinct attribute constraint to prevent allocating the same shared device in the same claim. 

## Motivation

A motivating use case is to allocate a shared network device in [CNI DRA driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cni-dra-driver)

> which can be selected by more than one pods on demand (on claim). 

Author: Yes, I mean it. Thank you for your suggestion. I applied the change.

you're proposing, but should not include things like API designs or
implementation. What is the desired outcome and how do we measure success?.
The "Design Details" section below is for the real
nitty-gritty.
-->

### User Stories (Optional)

See [all concrete use cases](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1U0u2uErpYcf-RooPEws5oDMiJ9kT2uDoWNjcWrLH224/edit?tab=t.f3ylp1uxsq1c).

This KEP mainly focuses on the request with selection of shared device (`device.shared == true`).

```yaml
selectors:
  - cel:
      expression: |-
        device.shared == true
```

Story|Consumable Capacity|Selector|Resource Request|AllocationMode|Constraint|Context
---|---|---|---|---|---|---
1|no|no|no|Exact(1)|no|network
2|no|no|no|Exact(2)|yes|network
3|no|yes|no|Exact(1)|no|network
4|yes|no|no|Exact(1)|no|network
5|yes|no|yes|Exact(1)|no|network
6|both|no|yes|Exact(1)|no|network

#### Story 1

A DRA driver advertises a shared device 
and a user simply requests a shared device.

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
...
spec:
  driver: simple-cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io
  devices:
  - name: eth1
    basic:
      shared: true
      attributes:

>         name:

Author: I removed the YAML in user story and moved to example section after the design.

    - requests:
      - macvlan
      opaque:
        driver: simple-cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io
        parameters: # CNIParameters with the GVK, interface name and CNI Config (in YAML format).
          apiVersion: cni.networking.x-k8s.io/v1alpha1
          kind: CNI
          ifName: "net1"
          config:
            cniVersion: 1.0.0
            name: net1
            plugins:
            - type: macvlan
              mode: bridge
              ipam:
                type: host-local
                ranges:
                - - subnet: 10.10.1.0/24
```
> The device config is out of the KEP scope. From this point, the request config will be omitted for simplicity.

#### Story 2

With the same resource as story 1, a user requests two devices.

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: macvlan-1
      deviceClassName: simple-shared.networking.x-k8s.io
      allocationMode: ExactCount
      count: 1
    - name: macvlan-2
      deviceClassName: simple-shared.networking.x-k8s.io
      allocationMode: ExactCount
      count: 1
    constraints:
    - requests:
      - macvlan-1
      - macvlan-2
      distinctAttribute: name
```

#### Story 3

> With the same resource as story 1, a user specifies a sharted device by some attributes such as name.

Author: No, it doesn't motivate this KEP. This only states supported use case. I removed this user story as suggested.

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: net1
      deviceClassName: simple-shared.networking.x-k8s.io
      selectors:
      - cel:
          expression: |-
            device.attributes["simple-cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io"].name == "eth1"
```

#### Story 4

A DRA driver specifies a consumable capacity with a minimum consume condition,
and a user requests the consumable resource.

> A scheduler selects devices according to the availability.

Author: I changed user story as below. This also covers previous story 5 in your following suggestion.

> A DRA driver for networks supports QoS guaranteed bandwidth which can ensures a specific bandwidth amount of the shared network can be reserved exclusively to resource requests. A DRA driver also specifies minimum, maximum amount of reserved capacity for each resource request. 
When requesting the guaranteed network device, 
users specifies their required guaranteed bandwidth. Otherwise, the default value defined by the DRA driver is applied.

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
...
spec:
  driver: guaranteed-cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io
  devices:
  - name: eth1
    basic:
      shared: true
      attributes:
        name:
          string: "eth1"
      capacity:
        bandwidth:
          claimPolicy:
            range:
              minimum: "1Mi"
              step: "8"
          value: "10Gi"
```

A shared device class with guaranteed bandwidth is defined below.

```yaml
kind: DeviceClass
metadata:
  name: bandwidth-guaranteed-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
  selectors:
  - cel:
      expression: |-
        device.driver == "guaranteed-cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io" &&
        device.shared == true
```

Then, a user defines the following resource claim.

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: net1
      deviceClassName: bandwidth-guaranteed-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
      capacities:
        requests:
          bandwidth: "1Gi"
```

#### Story 5

> A user omits the capacity request. 

Author: Merged to story 3.

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaim
...
spec:
  devices:
    requests:
    - name: net1
      deviceClassName: bandwidth-guaranteed-cni.networking.x-k8s.io
```

The default value is applied.

```yaml
kind: ResourceClaim
...
status:
  allocation:
    devices:
      results:
      - consumedCapacities:
          bandwidth: 1Mi
        device: eth1
        shared: true
        ...
```

#### Story 6

> A DRA driver specifies both consumable count to limit number of claim to share and non-consumable bandwidth capacity.

Author: I removed the story 6 since it is not actually user story but supported use cases.

```yaml
kind: ResourceSlice
...
spec:
  driver: complex-cni.dra.networking.x-k8s.io
  devices:
  - name: eth1
    basic:
      shared: true
      attributes:
        name:
          string: "eth1"
      capacity:
        bandwidth:
          value: 10Gi
        count:
          claimPolicy:
            set:
              default: "1"

>           value: 1000

Author: Updated the description of API to

```go
// CapacityConsumptionPolicyDiscrete defines a set of discrete allowable capacity values.
// If Options is not provided, only default value is valid.
//
// - If the requested amount is not listed in the options, it is rounded up to the next higher valid value.
// - If the requested amount exceeds the maximum value in the available options, the request does not satisfy the policy,
//   and the device cannot be allocated.
type CapacityConsumptionPolicyDiscrete struct {
    // Default specifies the default capacity to be used for a consumption request
    // if no value is explicitly provided.
    //
    // +required
    Default resource.Quantity

    // Options defines a list of additional valid capacity values that can be requested.
    //
    // +optional
    // +listType=atomic
    Options []resource.Quantity
}

```

```

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

<!--
What are the caveats to the proposal?
What are some important details that didn't come across above?
Go in to as much detail as necessary here.
This might be a good place to talk about core concepts and how they relate.
-->

### Risks and Mitigations

<!--
What are the risks of this proposal, and how do we mitigate? Think broadly.
For example, consider both security and how this will impact the larger
Kubernetes ecosystem.

How will security be reviewed, and by whom?

How will UX be reviewed, and by whom?

Consider including folks who also work outside the SIG or subproject.
-->

## Design Details

This enhancement introduces a `shared` field within the `BasicDevice` of the ResourceSlice
to mark whether the device is a shared device.
 The shared device can be assigned to more than one claim if it satisfies the request.
User needs to explicitly add the select condition device.shared to identify whether to select the shared device or not.

> The enhancement also adds a `claimPolicy`  field to `DeviceCapacity`.

Reviewer 2: We discussed in the meeting that this KEP might as well be called "shared devices". That's the other key concept. We decided against it because partitionable device are also shared.

But with that concept in mind, perhaps "sharingPolicy" works even better than "consumptionPolicy"?

> The enhancement also adds a `claimPolicy`  field to `DeviceCapacity`.

Author: I updated to use `consumptionPolicy`.

This field is used to identify the capacity which has a limited quantity and to specify capacity claim policy.

> If the cliam policy field is not empty. Either one of the policies must be defined with default value.

Author: If there is no policy, this capacity is not consumable.

```suggestion
The claim policy can be either of an available range `CapacityClaimPolicyRange` 
or a discrete set `CapacityClaimPolicySet`. The policy must have a default value.
```

> Users can define specific per-device resource requests through the newly added `CapacityRequest` field in the `DeviceRequest`.
> `Requests` of `CapacityRequest` is used for verifying minimum device capacity.

Author: Thank you. I will remove the problematic Requests field from the explanation for now.

```suggestion
Users can define specific per-device resource requests through the newly added `CapacityRequest` field 
in the `DeviceRequest`. Each `CapacityRequest` contains a minimum required device capacity.
```

If the capacity is consumable, the amount available for allocation is determined
by subtracting the aggregated allocation results of current claims from the device's capacity as defined in the resource slice.
The subtracted amount will be used solely by the allocator and will not be reflected in the resource slice.

> The subtracted amount is calculated based on the consumable conditions and will round the requested capacity up to the nearest valid amount under those conditions.

Author: Thank you. I will change to below for clarification.
```suggestion
The calculation of capacity requirements will round the requested capacity up to the nearest valid amount, based on the capacity's consumption policy.
```

If users do not specify a capacity request for consumable capacity, the default consumed value will be applied.

A shared device can only be allocated once its consumability has been verified
and its attributes match the request's selectors and constraints.

> The newly added `capacities` field in the `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` will be set when the allocation is successful.

Author: @johnbelamaric is actually the one who introduces the idea of this field. Could you please share your thought?

...
   // Shared marks whether the device is shared.
   //
   // The device with shared="true" can be allocated to more than one resource claim,
   //
   // +optional
   // +default=false
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   Shared *bool `json:"shared,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,9,opt,name=shared"`
}

// DeviceCapacity describes a quantity associated with a device.
type DeviceCapacity struct {
   // Value defines how much of a certain device capacity is available.
   //
   // +required
   Value resource.Quantity `json:"value" protobuf:"bytes,1,rep,name=value"`

   // ClaimPolicy specifies that this device capacity must be consumed
   // by each resource claim according to the defined consumption policy.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   ClaimPolicy *CapacityClaimPolicy `json:"claimPolicy,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=claimPolicy"`
}

// CapacityClaimPolicy defines consumption policy for consumable capacity.
// Either one of the consumption policies must be defined.
type CapacityClaimPolicy struct {
   // Set defines a set of acceptable quantities of consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=CapacityClaimPolicy

>    Set *CapacityClaimPolicySet `json:"set,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,opt,name=set"`

Author: I updated the API to
```go
// CapacityConsumptionPolicy defines consumption policy for consumable capacity.
// The policy can be either of an available range or a discrete set.
// The policy must have a default value.
// Either one of the consumption policies must be defined.
type CapacityConsumptionPolicy struct {
   // DiscreteValues defines a set of acceptable quantities of consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ConsumptionPolicy
   DiscreteValues *CapacityConsumptionPolicyDiscrete

   // ValueRange defines an acceptable quantity range of consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ConsumptionPolicy
   ValueRange *CapacityConsumptionPolicyRange
}
```

   // Range defines an acceptable quantity range of consuming requests.
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=CapacityClaimPolicy
   Range *CapacityClaimPolicyRange `json:"range,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=range"`
}

// CapacityClaimPolicySet defines a discrete set of allowable capacity values for consumption.
type CapacityClaimPolicySet struct {
   // Default specifies the default capacity to be used for a consumption request
   // if no value is explicitly provided.
   //
   // +required
   Default resource.Quantity `json:"default,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,name=default"`

   // Options defines a discrete set of additional valid capacity values that can be requested.
   // +optional
   // +listType=atomic
   Options []resource.Quantity `json:"options,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,rep,name=options"`
}

> // CapacityClaimPolicyRange defines a valid range of consuming capacity.

Author: I added the description and the also the risk and mitigations section.

```go
// CapacityConsumptionPolicyDiscrete defines a set of discrete allowable capacity values.
// If Options is not provided, only default value is valid.
//
// - If the requested amount is not listed in the options, it is rounded up to the next higher valid value.
// - If the requested amount exceeds the maximum value in the available options, the request does not satisfy the policy,
//   and the device cannot be allocated.

...
// CapacityConsumptionPolicyRange defines a valid range for consumable capacity values.
//
// - If the requested amount is less than Minimum, it is rounded up to the Minimum value.
// - If the requested amount exceeds Maximum (if set), the request does not satisfy the policy,
//   and the device cannot be allocated.
// - If the requested amount is between Minimum and Maximum, and ChunkSize is set,
//   it is rounded up to the nearest valid value based on the formula:
//
//     Rounded = Minimum + ⌈(Requested - Minimum) / ChunkSize⌉ × ChunkSize
//
// - If ChunkSize is not set, the requested amount is used as-is, provided it falls within the range.
```

copied from risk and mitigations section:
> The requested amount in the resource claim may not satisfy the capacity consumption policy,
  especially if the requested amount exceeds the maximum allowed consumption.
> This scenario should be handled similarly to other scheduling issues, such as when the request exceeds the allocatable capacity. 
> In such cases, the allocation should be rejected, and the user should be notified that the requested capacity cannot be fulfilled due to policy constraints.

type CapacityClaimPolicyRange struct {
   // Minimum specifies the minimum capacity required for a consumption request.
   // This field is required and serves as the default capacity to be consumed.
   //
   // +required
   Minimum resource.Quantity `json:"minimum,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,name=minimum"`

>    // Maximum specifies the maximum capacity that can be requested in a consumption request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   // Maximum specifies the maximum capacity that can be requested in a consumption request.
   // This adds another constraint in addition to the available capacity of the device.
```

   //
   // +optional
   Maximum *resource.Quantity `json:"maximum,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,2,opt,name=maximum"`

   // Step defines the incremental block size by which capacity can increase from the minimum.
   //
   // +optional
   Step *resource.Quantity `json:"step,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=step"`
}

```

#### ResourceClaimSpec's DeviceRequest

```go

type DeviceRequest struct {
...
   // Capacities define resource requirements against each capacity.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity

>    Capacities *CapacityRequirements `json:"capacities,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,9,opt,name=capacities"`

Reviewer 2: Perhaps call this "CapacityRequests" in analogy to https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/680ea07dbb2c6050d13b93660fa4d27d2d28d6eb/staging/src/k8s.io/api/core/v1/types.go#L2696?

Just "Requests" would be misleading because we already have such a field.

Or "Required"?

}

// CapacityRequirements defines the capacity requirements for a specific device request.
type CapacityRequirements struct {

>    // Requests specifies the requested quantity of device capacities for a device request.

Reviewer 2: As this is what users will look at to understand what they can put in here, explaining again about rounding and how this relates to devices would be useful.

Author: Thank you. I added the description as mentioned in previous comments:
https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5104#discussion_r2055772305

   // +optional

>    Requests map[QualifiedName]resource.Quantity `json:"requests,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,rep,name=requests"`

Reviewer: what about `Reservation` or `Consumption`?

>    Requests map[QualifiedName]resource.Quantity `json:"requests,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,1,rep,name=requests"`

Author: @pohly @LionelJouin 
After our call, I change from `Requests` to `Minimum` since it is straightforward to the purpose of this field.

```go
// CapacityRequirements defines the capacity requirements for a specific device request.
type CapacityRequirements struct {
    // Minimum defines the minimum quantity of device capacity required for each specified resource in the request.
    //
    // If the resource has a consumption policy, this value is rounded up to the nearest valid amount
    // according to that policy. The rounded value is used during scheduling to determine how much
    // capacity to consume.
    //
    // If the resource does not have a consumption policy, this value is used as an additional filtering
    // condition against the available capacity on the device.
    //
    // +optional
   Minimum map[QualifiedName]resource.Quantity
}
```

   // Potentially enhancement field.
   // Limits define the maximum amount of per-device resources allowed.
   // This enables burstable usage when applicable.
}

// DeviceConstraint must have exactly one field set besides Requests.
type DeviceConstraint struct {
	...
   // DistinctAttribute requires that all devices in question have this

>    // attribute and that its type and value are unique across those devices.

Reviewer 2: We probably want the type to be the same for all devices, right?

Usually it will be, but if not, then not allocating seems safer than considering the constraint met.

Reviewer 2: I retract this proposal after the discussion in the WG Device Management meeting. With the definition as given here, `distinctAttribute` is the logical opposite of `matchAttribute`, which is a nice property to have.

If device A has "foo" = "some string" and device B has "foo" = `false`, then `matchAttribute: foo` is false whereas `distinctAttribute: foo` is true. With my proposal, both would be false.

>    //
>    // For example, specify attribute name to get virtual devices from distinct shared physical devices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

We can't refer to "name" here because there is no guarantee that devices have such an attribute.

   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ConstraintType
   DistinctAttribute *FullyQualifiedName `json:"distinctAttribute,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,3,opt,name=distinctAttribute"`
}

```

#### ResourceClaimStatus's DeviceRequestAllocationResult

```go

type DeviceRequestAllocationResult struct {
 ...

>    // Shared indicates whether the allocated device can be shared by multiple claims.

Reviewer 2: We need to call out somewhere in the KEP that this is something that device drivers are meant to check.

They are supposed to check that the same device is not prepared more than once, but with a shared device that becomes valid.

   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity

>    Shared *bool `json:"shared,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,7,opt,name=shared"`

Reviewer: It possible to claim multiple time the same device. Would it make sense to add another key to the `DeviceRequestAllocationResult`? Like `SharedIndex` or `SharedUid`? I am asking because of KEP-4817 (Device Status). If a device is shared (let's say net1) and we create 2 MACVLANs on top of it (ethA and ethB), then they will both individual device status.

`SharedIndex` or `SharedUid` would be nil if device is not shared (so no need for `Shared *bool`)

Reviewer 2: As discussed in the WG Device Management meeting, let's go with UID. We could generate a unique index because it only needs to be unique within the claim, but if we ever allow reallocation or resizing after allocation, then an index might not be stable enough.

Instead of `SharedUid` I would like to propose `ShareUID` because this is "the globally unique identifier of the share allocated from the shared device".

`SharedUID` sounds too much like "a shared UID" which doesn't make sense...

   // ConsumedCapacities is used for tracking the capacity consumed per device by the claim request.

>    // The total consumed capacity for each device must not exceed its corresponding available capacity.

Reviewer 2: If we do rounding, then this should be document as the rounded value.

Author: Thank you. I added the following explanation.

 ```go
  // The consumed amount may differ from the requested amount—it is rounded up to the nearest valid
  // value based on the device’s consumption policy.
  //
  ```

   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   ConsumedCapacities map[QualifiedName]resource.Quantity `json:"consumedCapacities,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,8,rep,name=consumedCapacities"`
}

```

### Scheduling enhancement

> - define [share-related types and functions](https://github.com/sunya-ch/kubernetes/blob/kep-5075/staging/src/k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/structured/share.go).

Reviewer 2: I think this entire section is too detailed. We don't want to do a code review as part of the KEP review.

Can you try to summarize in plain English?

Author: Thank you. I removed the code and replaced with summarized sentences.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha

- Feature implemented behind a feature flag
- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys
- Complete features A, B, C
- Additional tests are in Testgrid and linked in KEP

#### GA

- N examples of real-world usage
- N installs
- More rigorous forms of testing—e.g., downgrade tests and scalability tests
- Allowing time for feedback

**Note:** Generally we also wait at least two releases between beta and
GA/stable, because there's no opportunity for user feedback, or even bug reports,
in back-to-back releases.

**For non-optional features moving to GA, the graduation criteria must include
[conformance tests].**

[conformance tests]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md

> #### Deprecation

Reviewer 2: You can remove this section.

for the KEP to move to `implementable` status and be included in the release.

In some cases, the questions below should also have answers in `kep.yaml`. This
is to enable automation to verify the presence of the review, and to reduce review
burden and latency.

The KEP must have a approver from the
[`prod-readiness-approvers`](http://git.k8s.io/enhancements/OWNERS_ALIASES)
team. Please reach out on the
[#prod-readiness](https://kubernetes.slack.com/archives/CPNHUMN74) channel if
you need any help or guidance.
-->

### Feature Enablement and Rollback

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting alpha to a release.
-->

###### How can this feature be enabled / disabled in a live cluster?

<!--
Pick one of these and delete the rest.

Documentation is available on [feature gate lifecycle] and expectations, as
well as the [existing list] of feature gates.

[feature gate lifecycle]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/feature-gates.md
[existing list]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/
-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)

>   - Feature gate name:

Author: @BenTheElder Thank you for your advice. 
I have updated adding prod-readiness entry, and the feature gate name, and I also filled the rest of questionnaire.

>   - Feature gate name:

Reviewer 10: Great, taking a look! (As a shadow, not an approver)

If no specific amount is requested, a default consumption value is applied.

### API enhancement
To enable this enhancement, the following API updates are proposed.

#### ResourceSliceSpec's Device

```go

// Device represents one individual hardware instance that can be selected based
// on its attributes. Besides the name, exactly one field must be set.
type Device struct {
...
   // AllowMultipleAllocations marks whether the device is allowed to be allocated for multiple times.
   //
   // A device with allowMultipleAllocations="true" can be allocated more than once,
   // and its capacity is shared, regardless of whether the CapacitySharingPolicy is defined or not.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   AllowMultipleAllocations *bool
}

// DeviceCapacity describes a quantity associated with a device.
type DeviceCapacity struct {
    // Value defines how much of a certain device capacity is available.
    //
    // If the capacity is consumable (i.e., a ClaimPolicy is specified),
    // the consumed amount is deducted and cached in memory by the scheduler.

>     // Note that the remaining capacity is not reflected in the resource slice.

Author: @aojea Yes, it should be. It works in the same manner of DRA. It will gather the allocated information from resourceclaim status. The allocating capacity information in the allocator is cached and processed the same way as the present allocating devices.

###### Allocator

**Allow Multiple Allocations**

- can allocate a device which allow multiple allocations for multiple times
- must not allocate a device which do not allow multiple allocations more than once
- can exclude dedicated device from allocation with CEL
- can limit allocation to multi-allocatable device with CEL
- can work with partitionable devices

**Consumable Capacity**

- can gather consumed capacity from allocated resource claims
- can add/remove consumed capacity of allocating devices
- can round up and compute user-requesting minimum capacity according to sharing policy range and chunk size
- can check sharing policy violation

**Distinct Attribute**
- can prevent allocating the same device in the same request with a distinct constraint
- can allocate different device in the same request with a distinct contraint

###### Coverage

- `k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/structured:`:	`6/4/2025` - `87.5`
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/apis/resource/validation`: `6/4/2025` - `97.8`
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/registry/resource/resourceclaim`: `6/5/2025` - `85.5` 
- `k8s.io/kubernetes/pkg/registry/resource/resourceslice`: `6/5/2025` - `69.1`

##### Integration tests

> The existing [integration tests for kube-scheduler which measure performance](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/integration/scheduler_perf#readme) will be extended to cover the overheaad of running the additional logic to support the features in this KEP. 

Reviewer 2: You can add:

"We will extend the [test for creating large ResourceSlices](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/78edda21a307ee193fb2ab52210638520af0a1b1/test/integration/dra/dra_test.go#L871-L892) to ensure that a ResourceSlice using the new fields satisfies the etcd limits."

-->

- [x] Feature gate (also fill in values in `kep.yaml`)
  - Feature gate name: DRAConsumableCapacity
  - Components depending on the feature gate:
    - kube-scheduler
    - kubelet
    - kube-apiserver
- [ ] Other
  - Describe the mechanism:
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime of the control
    plane?
  - Will enabling / disabling the feature require downtime or reprovisioning
    of a node?

###### Does enabling the feature change any default behavior?

<!--
Any change of default behavior may be surprising to users or break existing
automations, so be extremely careful here.
-->

No

###### Can the feature be disabled once it has been enabled (i.e. can we roll back the enablement)?

<!--
Describe the consequences on existing workloads (e.g., if this is a runtime
feature, can it break the existing applications?).

Feature gates are typically disabled by setting the flag to `false` and
restarting the component. No other changes should be necessary to disable the
feature.

NOTE: Also set `disable-supported` to `true` or `false` in `kep.yaml`.
-->

Yes, this feature can be disabled once it has been enabled.

> The `allowMultipleAllocations` flag, `sharingPolicy`, `capacityRequests`, and `consumedCapacities` fields will be dropped.

Author: These fields are dropped by the existing implementing strategy. Should it be ignored instead?

> The `allowMultipleAllocations` flag, `sharingPolicy`, `capacityRequests`, and `consumedCapacities` fields will be dropped.

Reviewer 11: > These fields are dropped by the existing implementing strategy. Should it be ignored instead?

There is per-feature flexibility to choose the best option, but often new usages of the fields are disallowed, but existing usages are allowed to remain.  that allows cleanup.  I think you've anticipated this in the next sentence about status retaining the information.

  - Components exposing the metric:
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### Are there any missing metrics that would be useful to have to improve observability of this feature?

<!--
Describe the metrics themselves and the reasons why they weren't added (e.g., cost,
implementation difficulties, etc.).
-->

Will consider in the beta timeframe.

### Dependencies

<!--
This section must be completed when targeting beta to a release.
-->

###### Does this feature depend on any specific services running in the cluster?

<!--
Think about both cluster-level services (e.g. metrics-server) as well
as node-level agents (e.g. specific version of CRI). Focus on external or
optional services that are needed. For example, if this feature depends on
a cloud provider API, or upon an external software-defined storage or network
control plane.

For each of these, fill in the following—thinking about running existing user workloads
and creating new ones, as well as about cluster-level services (e.g. DNS):
  - [Dependency name]
    - Usage description:
      - Impact of its outage on the feature:
      - Impact of its degraded performance or high-error rates on the feature:
-->

> This feature depends on the DRA structured parameters feature being enabled, and on DRA drivers being deployed.

Author: @BenTheElder Yes, the driver must support this feature. I will add the clarification.

and operation of this feature.
Recall that end users cannot usually observe component logs or access metrics.
-->

- [ ] Events
  - Event Reason: 
- [x] API .status
  - Condition name: 
  - Other field: `ResourceClaim.Status.Allocation.Devices.Results[].ShareID`
- [ ] Other (treat as last resort)
  - Details:

###### What are the reasonable SLOs (Service Level Objectives) for the enhancement?

<!--
This is your opportunity to define what "normal" quality of service looks like
for a feature.

It's impossible to provide comprehensive guidance, but at the very
high level (needs more precise definitions) those may be things like:
  - per-day percentage of API calls finishing with 5XX errors <= 1%
  - 99% percentile over day of absolute value from (job creation time minus expected
    job creation time) for cron job <= 10%
  - 99.9% of /health requests per day finish with 200 code

These goals will help you determine what you need to measure (SLIs) in the next
question.
-->

Existing DRA and related SLOs continue to apply.

###### What are the SLIs (Service Level Indicators) an operator can use to determine the health of the service?

> Will consider in the beta timeframe.

Reviewer 11: While not required for alpha, I do always encourage people to spend time considering the metrics they'll need for debugging early.  I suspect the existing metric for successful claims will be useful.

  Once changed to consumable, the same claim will guarantee the requested value, assuming sufficient capacity is available.

  **Mitigation:**
  - To preserve legacy behavior, the driver may default the capacity value to zero when the resource claim does not explicitly request the now-consumable device capacity.
  - Drivers should include logic to validate total allocation, ensuring that the sum of all consumable requests does not exceed the device’s actual capacity.
    This includes careful handling of capacity tracking and allocation logic.

  > [!NOTE] switching a capacity from consumable to non-consumable generally has less impact.
  > It loosens node-level filtering and results in claims no longer requesting a specific guaranteed amount.

For examples of device driver migration, see the [Examples](#examples) section below.

## Design Details

This enhancement introduces a `allowMultipleAllocations` field within the `Device` of the ResourceSlice
to mark whether the device is shareable among multiple resource claims (or requests).
The multi-allocatable device can be assigned to more than one request if it satisfies the selection criteria and constraints.

> The select condition `device.allowMultipleAllocations == true/false` is used to identify to select the device with a `allowMultipleAllocations` property or not.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The select condition `device.allowMultipleAllocations == true/false` can be used to select the device with a `allowMultipleAllocations` property or not in a CEL selector.
```

when its consumability has been verified and its attributes match the request's selectors and constraints.
The newly added `consumedCapacities` field in the `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` will be set to the calculated capacity upon a successful allocation.
This value may differ from the originally requested amount, as it is rounded up to the nearest valid value based on the device’s sharing policy.
If no specific amount is requested, a default consumption value is applied.

### API enhancement
To enable this enhancement, the following API updates are proposed.

#### ResourceSliceSpec's Device

```go

// Device represents one individual hardware instance that can be selected based
// on its attributes. Besides the name, exactly one field must be set.
type Device struct {
...
   // AllowMultipleAllocations marks whether the device is allowed to be allocated for multiple times.
   //
   // A device with allowMultipleAllocations="true" can be allocated more than once,
   // and its capacity is shared, regardless of whether the CapacitySharingPolicy is defined or not.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity

>    AllowMultipleAllocations *bool

Reviewer 2: xref prior thread for "enum vs bool": https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5104#discussion_r2094096057

I'm fine with a bool here because I cannot imagine other, future alternatives. A device is either shareable or it is not.

An enum makes a bit simpler to add new semantic if we clearly document "unknown value" as "ignore device", but we can get the same effect with a new field when being careful about how we roll out such a new alpha field (first ensure that all consumers know about it, then promote to beta). Because consumers are schedulers, this isn't too hard.

}

// DeviceCapacity describes a quantity associated with a device.
type DeviceCapacity struct {
    // Value defines how much of a certain device capacity is available.
    //
    // If the capacity is consumable (i.e., a ClaimPolicy is specified),
    // the consumed amount is deducted and cached in memory by the scheduler.
    // Note that the remaining capacity is not reflected in the resource slice.
    //
    // +required
    Value resource.Quantity

   // SharingPolicy specifies that this device capacity must be consumed
   // by each resource claim according to the defined sharing policy.

>    // The Device must allow multiple allocations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   // The Device must allow multiple allocations,
   // otherwise the policy is ignored.
```

Is that correct? Or is it causing a validation error?

Both is viable, we just need to document it. I'm undecided which one is better.

Reviewer 4: _If_ we call this `sharingPolicy`, I think this field should only be able to be set if the device is sharable.

It's not actually clear to me if some of the constraints around capacity consumption (default consumption, valid enumerated consumed amounts, valid min/max/step-size consumed amounts) might be useful even apart from shared devices... this reminds me a little of validations like [making sure hugepages request resources in the right increments](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/ced19ffab59fdc346318d1d0152581a1f213c711/pkg/apis/core/validation/validation.go#L7266-L7268) and [LimitRange enforcing min/max/default](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/ced19ffab59fdc346318d1d0152581a1f213c711/staging/src/k8s.io/api/core/v1/types.go#L7293-L7305), which were generically useful things.

If this is still useful in filtering devices / shaping consumption even when they're unshared, then let's call it something other than sharingPolicy and let it be defined even for unshared devices.

   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   SharingPolicy *CapacitySharingPolicy
}

// CapacitySharingPolicy defines how requests consume the available capacity.
// A policy must have a default value to be applied when no value is explicitly provided.

> // ValidSharingValues can either specify a range of valid values or a discrete set of them.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// It can either specify a range of valid values or a discrete set of them.
```

`ValidSharingValues` is not immediately obvious to users, it's more an internal thing.

// Exactly one of them must be defined.
// The default value must be a valid value.
type CapacitySharingPolicy struct {

>    // Default specifies the default capacity to be used for a consumption request

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   // Default specifies the default capacity to be used for a consumption request.
```

   // by ensuring attribute-level differentiation.
   //
   // This is useful for scenarios where resource requests must be fulfilled by separate physical devices.
   // For example, a container requests two network interfaces that must be allocated from two different physical NICs.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ConstraintType
   DistinctAttribute *FullyQualifiedName
}

```

#### ResourceClaimStatus's DeviceRequestAllocationResult

```go
type DeviceRequestAllocationResult struct {
  ...

	// ShareID uniquely identifies an individual allocation share of a device,
	// used when the device supports multiple simultaneous allocations.
	// It serves as an additional map key to differentiate concurrent shares
	// of the same device.
	//
	// The ID is randomly generated as a hexadecimal (hex) string for each allocation share.
	// It must be unique among all currently allocated shares for the same device
	// (i.e., uniqueness is required only at the device level, not globally).
	//
	// Hex is chosen for its compact representation, ease of generation from binary,
	// and suitability for identifiers in logs, APIs, and storage.
	//
	// +optional
	// +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity

> 	ShareID *string

Reviewer 2: Nit: indent with the same amount of spaces as elsewhere.

I'm undecided whether we want to enforce this as a hex value. This seems a bit unusual from an API perspective and, as presented here, doesn't specify a maximum length of the string.

Perhaps just go with the usual "must be a DNS label"? Doing it as a short hex string then becomes an implementation detail, without being part of the API.

Let's first clarify that before re-indenting, otherwise this comment thread is immediately "obsolete"...

- When this feature gate and `deviceStatusFeatureGate` ([KEP 4817](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4817)) are enabled, the `device` field in the allocated device status may contain a `/`. In that case, the first part must be validated as a device name, and the second part as a share ID. This extended device name should enable a one-to-one mapping with the allocation result which contains a share ID.
- If the feature gate is disabled, share ID and allow multi-allocation should be ignored. The device name with `/` should be failed.

###### Allocator

**Allow Multiple Allocations**

- can allocate a device which allow multiple allocations for multiple times
- must not allocate a device which do not allow multiple allocations more than once
- can exclude dedicated device from allocation with CEL
- can limit allocation to multi-allocatable device with CEL
- can work with partitionable devices

**Consumable Capacity**

- can gather consumed capacity from allocated resource claims
- can add/remove consumed capacity of allocating devices
- can round up and compute user-requesting minimum capacity according to sharing policy range and chunk size

> - can check sharing policy violation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- requested capacity for non-consumable capacity acts like a `>=` filter
```

The newly added `consumedCapacities` field in the `DeviceRequestAllocationResult` will be set to the calculated capacity upon a successful allocation.
This value may differ from the originally requested amount, as it is rounded up to the nearest valid value based on the device’s sharing policy.
If no specific amount is requested, a default consumption value is applied.

### API enhancement
To enable this enhancement, the following API updates are proposed.

#### ResourceSliceSpec's Device

```go

// Device represents one individual hardware instance that can be selected based
// on its attributes. Besides the name, exactly one field must be set.
type Device struct {
...
   // AllowMultipleAllocations marks whether the device is allowed to be allocated for multiple times.
   //
   // A device with allowMultipleAllocations="true" can be allocated more than once,
   // and its capacity is shared, regardless of whether the CapacitySharingPolicy is defined or not.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   AllowMultipleAllocations *bool
}

// DeviceCapacity describes a quantity associated with a device.
type DeviceCapacity struct {

>     // Value defines how much of a certain device capacity is available.

Reviewer 4: non-blocking nit to tweak during impl or in a follow-up: I'd probably drop or rephrase "available" from the doc here, since that is ambiguous whether it is real-time / updated as the device is allocated and then used

    // the consumed amount is deducted and cached in memory by the scheduler.
    // Note that the remaining capacity is not reflected in the resource slice.
    //
    // +required
    Value resource.Quantity

   // SharingPolicy specifies that this device capacity must be consumed
   // by each resource claim according to the defined sharing policy.
   // The Device must allow multiple allocations.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   SharingPolicy *CapacitySharingPolicy
}

// CapacitySharingPolicy defines how requests consume the available capacity.
// A policy must have a default value to be applied when no value is explicitly provided.
// It can either specify a range of valid values or a discrete set of them.
// Exactly one of them must be defined.
// The default value must be a valid value.
type CapacitySharingPolicy struct {
   // Default specifies the default capacity to be used for a consumption request.
   //
   // +required
   Default resource.Quantity

   // DiscreteValues defines a set of acceptable quantity values in consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ValidSharingValues

>    DiscreteValues *CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete

Reviewer 4: non-blocking: on the way to implementation, consider if we need the nesting levels or if this could simplify / flatten to `ValidValues []resource.Quantity`

   // ValueRange defines an acceptable quantity value range in consuming requests.
   //
   // +optional
   // +oneOf=ValidSharingValues

>    ValueRange *CapacitySharingPolicyRange

Reviewer 4: non-blocking, can think about this as we implement: if we rename the above option to `ValidValues`, this could rename to `ValidRange` or something similar

   // Potential extension: allow defining a `strategy` on a specific capacity
   // to specify default scheduling behavior when it is not explicitly requested.
}

// CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete defines a set of discrete allowed capacity values.
//
// If the requested amount is not listed in the options, it cannot be allocated to this device.
type CapacitySharingPolicyDiscrete struct {

>     // Options defines a list of additional valid capacity values that can be requested.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    // Options defines the list of valid capacity values that can be requested.
```

}

// CapacitySharingPolicyRange defines a valid range for consumable capacity values.
//
// - If the requested amount is less than Minimum, it is rounded up to the Minimum value.
// - If the requested amount is between Minimum and Maximum, ChunkSize is set,
//   and the amount does not align with the ChunkSize,
//   it will be rounded up to the next value matching Minimum + (n * ChunkSize).
// - If the requested or rounded amount exceeds Maximum (if set), the request does not satisfy the policy,
//   and the device cannot be allocated.
//
// - If ChunkSize is not set, the requested amount is used as-is, provided it falls within the range.
type CapacitySharingPolicyRange struct {
    // Minimum specifies the minimum capacity allowed for a consumption request.
    //
    // Minimum must be less than or equal to the capacity value.
    // Default must be more than or equal to the minimum.
    //
    // +required
    Minimum resource.Quantity

    // Maximum defines the upper limit for capacity that can be requested.
    //
    // Maximum must be less than or equal to the capacity value.
    // Minimum and default must be less than or equal to the maximum.
    //
    // +optional

>     Maximum *resource.Quantity

Reviewer 4: non-blocking, but make a note to decide whether to use Minimum/Maximum or match LimitRange and use Min/Max

    // ChunkSize defines the step size between valid capacity amounts within the range.
    //
    // Maximum and default must be a multiple of the chunk size.
    // Minimum + chunk size must be less than or equal to the capacity value.
    //
    // +optional

>     ChunkSize *resource.Quantity

Reviewer 4: non-blocking question: is there a more intuitive / standard name for this? Can think about it on the way to implementation, maybe StepSize or UnitSize?

}
```

#### ResourceClaimSpec's DeviceRequest

The `CapacityRequests` field is defined within each supported device request type, such as `DeviceSubRequest` and `ExactDeviceRequest`.

```go
// DeviceSubRequest is similar to ExactDeviceRequest, but doesn't expose the
// AdminAccess field as that one is only supported when requesting a
// specific device.
type DeviceSubRequest struct {
...
   // CapacityRequests define resource requirements against each capacity.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   CapacityRequests *CapacityRequirements
}

// ExactDeviceRequest is a request for one or more identical devices.
type ExactDeviceRequest struct {
...
   // CapacityRequests define resource requirements against each capacity.
   //
   // +optional
   // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity

>    CapacityRequests *CapacityRequirements

Reviewer 4: non-blocking question, can think about this on the way to implementation: do we envision other things going under CapacityRequirements in the future? would `minimumCapacity map[QualifiedName]resource.Quantity` inline here be simpler and more usable, or too limiting for future expansion? (same question below)

}

// CapacityRequirements defines the capacity requirements for a specific device request.
type CapacityRequirements struct {
    // Minimum defines the minimum amount of each device capacity required for the request.

>     // Each minimum amount must be a standard Quantity.

Reviewer 4: what does "standard" quantity mean?

    //
    // If the capacity has a sharing policy, this value is rounded up to the nearest valid amount
    // according to that policy. The rounded value is used during scheduling to determine how much capacity to consume.
    //

>     // If the quantity does not have a sharing policy, this value is used as an additional filtering

Reviewer 4: The filtering aspect happens whether or not there's a sharing policy defined, right? If a request asks for 5 widgets, devices that don't have 5 widgets of capacity are excluded.

  // However, the index may become outdated if the allocation is reallocated (should that ever be supported),
  // making it less reliable than ShareID.

  // ConsumedCapacities tracks the amount of capacity consumed per device as part of the claim request.
  // The consumed amount may differ from the requested amount: it is rounded up to the nearest valid
  // value based on the device’s sharing policy if applicable.
  //
  // The total consumed capacity for each device must not exceed its available capacity.
  //
  // This field references only consumable capacities of a device and is empty when there are none.
  //
  // +optional
  // +featureGate=DRAConsumableCapacity
   ConsumedCapacities map[QualifiedName]resource.Quantity
}

// AllocatedDeviceStatus contains the status of an allocated device, if the
// driver chooses to report it. This may include driver-specific information.
type AllocatedDeviceStatus struct {
	// Device references one device instance via its name in the driver's
	// resource pool. It must be a DNS label.
	//
	// If the allocation result includes a ShareID, the Device field is extended with the ShareID,

> 	// formatted as `<device name>/<share id>`.

Reviewer 2: We had it as a separate field initially, but it turned out that you [were right about warning that separate field as a new key in the status list map](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/pull/5104#discussion_r2101136766).

Encoding more information in an existing string is the lesser evil - not nice conceptually, but it works.

@sunya-ch: this one of those aspects that need to be added as additional source code comment in the types.go (i.e. outside of the doc comment), because that is where future readers will find it when wondering about the API design.

> 	// formatted as `<device name>/<share id>`.

Reviewer 4: oh, I didn't realize this was an existing field.... then I *really* don't think we should redefine it to smush in another value / change the meaning and format

> 	// formatted as `<device name>/<share id>`.

Reviewer 4: we're on the cusp of promoting to v1, this seems really important to pin down... if we can't add new optional fields, AND give them defaults, AND make them key fields to allow for otherwise-duplicate items in `[]AllocatedDeviceStatus`, we're in a sticky spot

did we over-specify the map-list aspects of `Devices []AllocatedDeviceStatus` in ways we can't evolve? do we need to tweak anything there or is there anything we can tweak?

```
	// +listType=map
	// +listMapKey=driver
	// +listMapKey=device
	// +listMapKey=pool
	// +featureGate=DRAResourceClaimDeviceStatus
	Devices []AllocatedDeviceStatus `json:"devices,omitempty" protobuf:"bytes,4,opt,name=devices"`
```

> 	// formatted as `<device name>/<share id>`.

Reviewer 2: Small correction: `Devices []AllocatedDeviceStatus` is not going to GA in 1.34 because it is not part of core DRA. It's part of https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/issues/4817, which remains in beta.

Still important to figure out, of course!
